The Book: The Objectives of the Sharia (Maqasid al-Sharia) According to Imam al-Shatibi: A Jurisprudential and Usul al-Fiqh Study
Authored by: Mahmoud Abdul Hadi Faour
Edition: First 1427 AH - 2006 CE
Publisher: Basyouni Printing Telephone: 836014/03 Sidon - Lebanon
Mahmoud Abdul Hadi Faour


The Objectives of the Sharia (Maqasid al-Sharia) According to Imam al-Shatibi


Study of Usul al-Fiqh (Principles of Jurisprudence)


The first edition
1427 AH - 2006 CE


Basyuni for Printing
Phone: 836014/03
Sidon - Lebanon


In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.
The introduction


All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds, and peace and blessings be upon our master Muhammad, and upon his family and all his companions, and upon those who follow them in goodness until the Day of Judgment.
And I bear witness that there is no deity except Allah alone, with no partner for Him, and that Muhammad is His servant and Messenger. He conveyed the message and fulfilled the trust, and he bore witness to the nation and called Allah as a witness to that. He said: "O Allah, have I conveyed [the message]?" They said: Yes. He said: "O Allah, bear witness," three times they said: Yes, they bear witness for themselves, and he (peace and blessings be upon him) bears witness for them, then Allah, Exalted is He, bears witness to that. Then he (peace and blessings be upon him) joined the highest companion, and the companions after him carried the trust and fulfilled it in the best manner, and they conveyed it to those after them, and the truth appeared and falsehood perished, Islam prevailed and darkness was dispelled.
Then after them came a generation that neglected the trust and thus they were lost; they exchanged fire for light, so they were burned and did not find illumination. They forgot Allah, so He made them forget themselves; they became deaf while they could hear, their eyes see but they are blind and do not perceive. They have hearts with which they desire, but they do not understand, and they are constricted in their chests. Say, "Indeed, the guidance of Allah is the true guidance, and whoever Allah guides is the rightly guided, and whoever He leads astray, you will not find for him a guiding ally." As for what follows,
