Al-Bazdawi said: "Justice (adl) for us is the effect. And by effect, we mean what has an effect in the Sharia"(1). The commentator on the principles of al-Bazdawi in Kashf al-Asrar said: "The Sheikh explained in some of his writings with this phrase: And by influence, we mean that the nature of that description has an influence in establishing the nature of that ruling in the case of the ruling, either indicated by the Book or by the Sunnah or by consensus. That is, the effect of this description is established by these proofs. Some of the usuli scholars mentioned that the highest types of influential analogy (qiyas) are"(2). He cites the saying that the influential is the highest type of analogy attributed to some usuli scholars and not to himself. He states that the influential has four categories: the specific in the specific, the specific in the general, the general in the specific, and the general in the general(3). Meanwhile, al-Ghazali distinguishes between the influential and the appropriate: "The difference between them is that the influential is that which has shown the effect of its essence in the essence of the disputed ruling by consensus or text in the place of dispute or outside of it... As for the appropriate, we mean that its genus is known to be influential in the genus of that ruling"(4). Thus, the influential according to al-Bazdawi is divided into these four categories, while according to al-Ghazali, the influential is one of the four categories. This disagreement applies to the imams of usul from the Shafi'i and Hanafi schools.
B - The Suitable:
__________
(1) The pride of Islam al-Bazdawi, The Foundations of the Pride of Islam al-Bazdawi. 3/512, edited by Abdullah Mahmoud Muhammad Omar, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya - Beirut, 1st edition, 1418 AH - 1997 CE, printed with its commentary: The Unveiling of Secrets, by Ala al-Din al-Bukhari.
(2) Alaa al-Din al-Bukhari, Kashf al-Asrar 'an Usul Fakhr al-Islam al-Bazdawi, 3/512, see: the previous footnote.
(3) Alaa al-Din al-Bukhari, Kashf al-Asrar 'an Usul Fakhr al-Islam al-Bazdawi, p. 513.
(4) Al-Ghazali, Shifa al-Ghalil, p. 148 - 149.
