And there are conflicting reports about Imam Malik (may Allah be pleased with him). Al-Shatibi said: "He elaborated on it as one who is deeply immersed in understanding the meanings of public interest (maslaha), while considering the intention of the Lawgiver so that he does not deviate from it or contradict any of its principles, to the extent that many scholars found many aspects of his elaboration objectionable, claiming that he had removed the yoke and opened the door to legislation, and how far removed he was from that! May Allah have mercy on him." (1) Al-Juwayni said about him: "It was seen that he established interests far removed from the usual interests and known meanings in the Sharia, and this led him to innovate killing and taking wealth based on interests that he presumed to exist, even if he did not find a basis for those interests in the principles. Moreover, there was no stopping at that; rather, his opinion was whatever he saw fit, and he was free from the burdens of suspicion and ulterior motives." (2) Ibn Qudamah al-Maqdisi said: "It has been reported that Malik said: It is permissible to kill a third of the people for the benefit of the two-thirds." (3) In contrast to these statements, there are those who deny this attribution to Imam Malik. Al-Shawkani said: "A group of Malikis denied what was attributed to Malik regarding this opinion, including al-Qurtubi, who said: Al-Shafi'i and most of Abu Hanifah's companions went to not rely on it, which is also Malik's position. He said: The Imam of the Two Holy Sanctuaries (Imam al-Haramayn) was bold in what he attributed to Malik regarding excess in this principle, and this does not exist in Malik's books or in any of his companions' books." (4) Al-Amidi said: "The appropriate transmitted report... The jurists from the Shafi'is, Hanafis, and others have agreed on the prohibition of relying on it, which is the truth, except for what has been reported about Malik that he holds this view, despite his companions denying it. And if the transmission is correct from him, it is more likely that he did not say this regarding every interest, but rather regarding those interests that are necessary and universally established." (5)
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-I'tisam, 2/388.
(2) Al-Juwayni, al-Burhan, 2/721. Paragraph: 1128.
(3) Ibn Qudamah al-Maqdisi, Rawdat al-Nazir wa Jannat al-Manazir, p. 150.
(4) Al-Shawkani, Irshad al-Fuhul, p. 242.
(5) Al-Amidi, al-Ahkam, 4/394.
