Dr. Hito says: "As for attributing the statement to Malik with this type of indirect reasoning, it is a disputed attribution"(1). Dr. Hito has proven the error of attributing many statements to Imam Malik (may Allah have mercy on him)(2).
This amount of contradiction is due to the differing meanings of "the transmitted (al-mursal)" among the conflicting parties and the narrators. The term "the transmitted" has been used to mean that which has not been known to be abrogated or disregarded entirely, meaning it has not been witnessed by any ruling. It has also been used to mean something that is appropriate or strange.
As for the first meaning: everyone has agreed to reject it. This is what is meant by denying its attribution to the Shafi'is and the Hanafis and by denying it from Malik.
As for the second meaning: the majority rejected it, and those who accepted it stipulated that it must be appropriate. It was reported that there is consensus on its rejection if it is strange. Some said it could be accepted, and the details are as follows:
As for whether it is sent (marsool) in general, here are some opinions on it:
Al-Amidi said: "The interests (masalih) are divided according to the testimony of the Sharia into those that are recognized and those that are annulled, and those that have neither recognition nor annulment. The latter is referred to as the unqualified suitable (al-munasib al-mursal)... This category is uncertain between the two aforementioned categories, and its classification into one of them is not more valid than the other. Therefore, it is prohibited to use it as evidence without a recognized testimony that indicates it belongs to the category of the recognized rather than the annulled."(3)
Al-Zain al-Din ibn Abd al-Salam said: "Likewise, there is no ruling except for Him (i.e., for Allah), so His rulings are derived from the Book, the Sunnah, consensus (ijma), sound analogies (qiyas), and accepted proofs. No one has the right to deem something good (istihsan) or to employ public interest (maslaha mursala), nor to follow someone whom he has not been commanded to follow."(4)
__________
(1) Hayto, his introduction to the selected comments on the principles, margin. p: 354 - 365.
(2) The same place.
(3) Al-Amidi, al-Ihkam, 4/160.
(4) Izz al-Din ibn Abd al-Salam, The Principles of Rulings in the Interests of the People, p. 304, Al-Rayan Foundation - Beirut, 1410 AH - 1990 CE, revised new edition.
