Mujd al-Din ibn Taymiyyah said: "The public interests (masalih mursala) cannot be used as a basis for rulings. This was stated by al-Baqillani and a group of theologians" (1).
Ibn al-Hajib al-Maliki said: "The public interests are interests that do not have a foundational basis in the Sharia, even if they align with the principles of public interests and are accepted by reason" (2). He then said: "We have no evidence, so it must be rejected, as in the case of istihsan (juridical preference)" (3).
Similarly, al-Fakhr al-Razi rejected them if they are understood in this sense, stating that they are rejected by consensus, even though he is among those who accept public interests, which indicates that he does not mean by 'public interests' what is universally accepted. He said: "A suitable reason that does not correspond to or have a specific foundational basis is thus rejected by consensus, and an example of this is the deprivation of the murderer from inheritance, opposing his intended purpose if we assume there is no text regarding it" (4).
We find the same position with al-Shatibi; if it is understood in the broad sense of 'public interests', he clarifies that what is thus understood is invalid and constitutes legislation by reason, and he conveys that this public interest is rejected by consensus. He states: "The suitability does not necessitate a ruling by itself; rather, this is the view of the proponents of rational improvement. However, if the meaning becomes clear and we understand from the Sharia that it should be considered in deriving rulings, then we accept it, for what we mean by public interest is what is understood to be taken into account in relation to people regarding public interests and the prevention of harms in a way that reason cannot independently grasp. If the Sharia does not support that meaning, but rather rejects it, it is thus rejected by the agreement of the Muslims" (5).
__________
(1) Ibn Taymiyyah, al-Maswada, p. 450. Edited by Muhammad Muhyi al-Din Abdul Hamid, Dar al-Kitab al-Arabi - Beirut.
(2) Ibn al-Hajib, the commentaries of al-Taftazani and al-Jurjani on the Mukhtasar al-Muntaha al-Usuli. 2/389. Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya - Beirut.
(3) The same source.
(4) Al-Razi, al-Mahsool. 5/167.
(5) Al-Shatibi, al-I'tisam. 2/374.
