Al-Razi said: "A suitable analogy that does not have a specific origin to support it, meaning that it considers its genus in its genus, but there is no origin that indicates the consideration of its specific instance in its specific instance, and this is the concept of public interest (maslaha) that is not explicitly stated" (1). He then said: "An example of the effect of the genus in the genus is the reasoning for rulings that do not have specific origins to support them, such as when Ali (may Allah be pleased with him) established drinking in place of slander, treating the presumption of a thing as its equivalent, analogous to treating seclusion with a woman as equivalent to intercourse in terms of prohibition" (2). This very example was mentioned by al-Shawkani as an example of the strange analogy (3).
Thus, the public interest (maslaha) according to those who accept it is the strange or suitable one; it does not have a specific origin to support it, nor does it have any origin at all. As for what is considered public interest in general, it is rejected without dispute. The strange suitable analogy is rejected by al-Shatibi. He does not suffice with the testimony of one origin or a few origins to affirm the consideration of the genus, but rather he requires that many origins testify to it, to the extent that it reaches the level of certainty in his view. He says: "It must be suitable for the actions of the Sharia, which means that there exists for that meaning a genus that the legislator has considered in general without specific evidence, which is the reasoning that is called public interest (maslaha) that is not explicitly stated" (4). He states: "Every legal origin that does not have a specific text to support it and is suitable for the actions of the Sharia, and its meaning is derived from its evidences, is valid and can be relied upon and referred to if that origin has become certain by the totality of its evidences... and this includes the reasoning that Malik and al-Shafi'i relied upon" (5).
__________
(1) Al-Razi, al-Mahsool. 5/167.
(2) The same source.
(3) See p. 86 of this book. This example also contradicts what has been reported about the consensus on rejecting the strange analogy. It is interpreted that al-Razi does not consider this example as strange, but rather as suitable in his view. He has an argument for this that is not the subject of our discussion.
(4) Al-Shatibi, al-I'tisam. 2/375.
(5) The same source, 1/16.
