As for what was previously quoted from al-Qarafi: "Upon investigation, it is general in the schools of thought." If what he meant by public interest (maslaha) or the appropriate cause (al-munasib) is the meaning we are searching for, then the statements mentioned above decisively refute his claim.
It should be noted here - even though this is not our topic - that the public interest (maslaha) which is general in the schools of thought and accepted by consensus is not that which has no specific ruling, but rather that which has no specific text, while being supported by general or comprehensive evidence that includes it under its categories or parts without being explicitly mentioned. In this sense, it includes, for example, the compilation of the Qur'an that was done by Abu Bakr al-Siddiq (may Allah be pleased with him) and the codex that was compiled by Uthman ibn Affan (may Allah be pleased with him), and the documentation of the registers that was done by Umar ibn al-Khattab (may Allah be pleased with him)(1). These matters and similar ones fall under general or comprehensive evidences such as: "What is necessary for the obligation to be fulfilled is itself obligatory," and "There should be no harm nor reciprocating harm," and "The default ruling of things is permissibility unless there is evidence for prohibition," among others. All these actions are unqualified by specific or particular evidence that states the incident explicitly, but they are included under general or comprehensive evidence. This meaning is what al-Shatibi intended as he clarified in al-I'tisam and al-Muwafaqat(2).
Conditions of the appropriate description:
Those who advocate for the path of appropriateness have set two conditions for reasoning based on the appropriate description:
First: The description must be considered. That is, the ruling that is being reasoned must have that description present in it. In other words, the ruling must be in accordance with it.
__________
(1) See: al-Ansari, Fawatih al-Rahmout. 2/301.
(2) We will dedicate a discussion later - if Allah wills - to al-Shatibi's intended meaning of public interests.
