He said: "It has become clear to us that they - may Allah be pleased with them - in the long ages and extended periods did not confine themselves to fixed opinions, but rather they would engage in reasoning as those who do not see a limit to the avenues of opinion, and they viewed the paths of consideration as not restricted. Then the later generations would follow the earlier ones and did not concern themselves with mentioning limited avenues that could not be exceeded. Thus, we know by necessity of reason that they were receiving meanings and benefits from the sources of the Sharia that they relied upon in incidents where there were no texts. If they presumed something and their opinion was not contradicted by a principle from the principles of the Sharia, they would apply it, and it became clear that they were not seeking certain knowledge but were content with presuming something as knowledge"(1). Al-Ghazali said: "There is no way to limit oneself to the influential factor because what is sought is the predominance of presumption. Whoever examines the analogies (qiyas) of the Companions - may Allah be pleased with them - and their juristic efforts knows that they did not condition every analogy on the cause being known through text and consensus"(2). He said: "We have not seen from the consensus of the Companions - may Allah be pleased with them - anything other than following the predominant opinion, and they did not specify the types of predominance of presumption nor did they distinguish one type from another"(3).
Al-Amidi said: "If it is established that the rulings were legislated for the interests of the servants, then if we see a legislated ruling that entails a matter of public interest (maslaha), it must either be that this is the objective of legislating the ruling, or it is something that has not been made apparent to us. It cannot be what has not been made apparent to us, otherwise the legislation of the ruling would be merely an act of devotion, which contradicts the principle(4) as previously established. Therefore, it remains that it is legislated for what has been made apparent. And if this is presumed, then it must be acted upon, because presumption is obligatory to follow in the Sharia."(5)
Al-Razi said: "We say: the relationship (munasaba) provides an indication of causality, and it is obligatory to act upon this indication."(6)
Responses of the Refuters of the Method of Appropriateness and Induction:
__________
(1) The same source, 2/527, paragraph: 760.
(2) Al-Ghazali, Al-Mustasfa. 2/299.
(3) Al-Ghazali, Al-Mustasfa, p. 301.
(4) And that the basis of rulings and their reasoning.
(5) Al-Amidi, Al-Ihkam fi Usul al-Ahkam 3/250.
(6) Al-Razi, Al-Mahsool. 5/172.
