This debate led to further research, reflection, and deepening of understanding. Al-Juwayni (may Allah have mercy on him) defended the approach of analogy (qiyas) and the use of reasoning, accusing those who rejected them of a lack of understanding of these principles. He responded to the claim that it rules without evidence and relies on reason, stating that this only applies to those who do not follow al-Shafi'i's (may Allah be pleased with him) method in this regard. He said about Abu Hanifa (may Allah be pleased with him) and his companions: "In general, they have neither a little nor a lot of knowledge of the principles of jurisprudence. If one of them establishes a ruling for a matter, we will refute it in the details of the branches, for their companion did not base his rulings on principles, but rather he issued them based on what came to him. Thus, whoever among his companions wants to organize his rulings according to a principle will find himself contradicting in the details of the branches" (1). He also said: "As for Abu Hanifa, we do not deny his sharp intellect and the quality of his mind in grasping the nature of transactions and the ranks of governance. He is excellent in this field and adept at formulating issues well, but he is not knowledgeable about the principles of the Sharia, which for him are divided into an origin he is ignorant of or has overlooked and forgotten, and another that he adhered to and understood. He approached the categorization of chapters as one who did not draw from the foundations. It is remarkable that he did not take care to gather reports and narrations to base his issues upon, but rather he connects the branches based on what he sees and then seeks support from what he reaches in agreement" (2).
__________
(1) Al-Juwayni, Al-Burhan. 2/587. Paragraph: 784.
(2) Al-Juwayni, Al-Burhan. 2/748. Paragraph: 1180. This statement from al-Juwayni (may Allah have mercy on him) can only be seen as an unjust accusation against Abu Hanifa (may Allah have mercy on him) and his companions. My aim here is not to discuss this accusation, but I will quickly point out its fallacy. It is refuted by the very text that affirms the sharp intellect of the greatest Imam and the quality of his mind. Furthermore, we have not found what al-Juwayni claimed, that Abu Hanifa's companions have neither a little nor a lot of knowledge of the principles, but rather we found them, like others, to be leaders and scholars, and they are the ones who were called jurists (fuqaha) in contrast to the theologians (mutakallimun). As for the claim that Abu Hanifa is not knowledgeable about the principles... etc., it is countered by the stability of the school and the acceptance of the community over hundreds of years. Were it not for the fact that the school is based on principles and foundational rules and systematic reasoning, it would have faded away and would not have lasted even a single generation. The fact that the science of the principles of jurisprudence was not established with its rules, limits, and conditions until the time of Imam al-Shafi'i (may Allah be pleased with him) and afterward does not harm Abu Hanifa (may Allah have mercy on him). If it were harmful to him, it would also be harmful to the Companions, the Followers, and all the Imams before him, which is not the case. We do not think there is any reason for this injustice from al-Juwayni except the intensity of the debate and the strength of the arguments of his opponents, which narrowed his perspective and blocked his avenues of reasoning, prompting him to attack his opponents in opinion. Therefore, we see him saying what he says about Abu Hanifa and his companions (may Allah be pleased with them), and we will see some of that regarding Malik and his companions (may Allah be pleased with them), and we will see him praising al-Shafi'i (may Allah be pleased with him) greatly.
