However, this state was unable to protect the Muslims in Andalusia, so cities and fortresses fell, which aroused the ambitions of the Christians who tried to eliminate Granada, but they could not, and Granada grew stronger(1). Granada became a refuge for Muslims fleeing from the advance of the Christians since the establishment of the Nasrid state. Al-Maqri says: "When the Franks seized most of the lands of Andalusia, its people migrated there, and it became the desired city"(2).
During the era of Granada, there were three powerful Christian kingdoms: Portugal, Aragon, and Castile, with the latter being the strongest of these kingdoms. Each of these kingdoms was individually stronger than Granada. They united their forces and sought assistance from others, launching crusades against Granada, and were able to achieve some victories, yet they did not accomplish their objectives.
Then the Crusader forces gathered and attacked Granada, and the Muslims sought assistance from Morocco, and events and wars took place in which the Muslims achieved a tremendous victory in the year 674 AH.
The conflict continued, and in the year 718 AH, the Castilians attacked Granada and advanced upon it with the help of the English. The Muslims sought assistance from the Marinids in Morocco, and they responded. The Muslims were able to achieve victory and defeat the Franks in a battle near Granada(3).
The confrontations between the Muslims and the Spaniards continued, and the Muslims were defeated in a naval battle in the year 740 AH - 1339 CE, in which forces from Aragon, Castile, and Portugal participated. A battle occurred in the year 741 AH, which was the Battle of Tarifa, in which the Muslims used cannons that fired flames for the first time, but they lost the battle. The Crusaders, when victorious in a battle, committed the most heinous atrocities against the Muslims(4).
__________
(1) See: The History of Morocco and Andalusia, the previous reference, p. 162.
(2) Abu al-Abbas Ahmad al-Maqri, Nafh al-Tayyib fi Ghusn al-Andalus al-Ratib, 1/148, 7 volumes, edited by Ihsan Abbas, 1st edition, Dar Sader - Beirut.
(3) See: History of Morocco and Andalusia, p. 165.
(4) See: The History of Morocco and Al-Andalus, p. 169.
