Then he said: "Moreover, the rulings are what the Messenger brought, and they were a mercy to the worlds due to His saying, Exalted is He: { And We have not sent you except as a mercy to the worlds } (1). If the rulings were devoid of wisdom that returns to the worlds, they would not be a mercy but rather a punishment, as the obligation of adhering to them would be mere toil and hardship. Also, His saying, Exalted is He: { And My mercy encompasses all things } (2). If the legislation of the rulings concerning the servants was not for a wisdom, it would be a punishment, not a mercy for the reasons mentioned. Furthermore, his saying, peace and blessings be upon him: "There is no harm and no harming in Islam" (3). If the obligation of the rulings were not for a wisdom that returns to the servants, then their legislation would be pure harm, and that would be contrary to Islam, which is against the text" (4).
Then al-Amidi concluded with the result, saying: "And if it is established that the rulings were legislated for the interests of the servants, then if we see a legislated ruling that entails a beneficial matter, it must either be that this is the objective of legislating the ruling, or that which is not apparent to us. The objective cannot be that which is not apparent to us; otherwise, the legislation of the ruling would be mere obedience, which is contrary to the principle, as previously established. Therefore, it remains that it is legislated for what has become apparent. If this is presumed, then it must be acted upon, because presumption is obligatory to follow in the Sharia, and this is indicated by the consensus of the Companions on acting upon presumption and the obligation to follow it in legal rulings" (5).
__________
(1) Al-Anbiya, 107.
(2) Al-A'raf, 156.
(3) The hadith: "There is no harm and no harming" was narrated by Ibn Majah (2331) and (2332), Ahmad in the Musnad (2719), and Malik in the Muwatta (1234). It is authentic due to the abundance of its supporting evidence, and the addition in "Islam" is from the narration of al-Tabarani in al-Awsat. See: Nasb al-Rayah by al-Zayla'i, 4/386.
(4) Al-Amidi, al-Ihkam 3/250.
(5) The same source.
