And al-Amidi's response to these two objections is: "From three aspects: The first: That ability (qudra) only pertains to creation and existence, and nothing else; disbelief (kufr) and types of sins and evils are related to disobeying the prohibition of the Lawgiver, and that is not related to ability in any way. The second: Even if we concede that all of that is created by Allah, we do not claim that wisdom (hikmah) necessarily accompanies His actions absolutely, so that it applies to every created thing; rather, we only claim that in matters where wisdom can be considered, which is possible in everything except for types of evils and sins, and we do not claim that categorically, but rather apparently. The third: Even if we concede that wisdom necessarily accompanies His actions absolutely, we do not concede the impossibility of that in the cases they mentioned, as it is possible that what follows from them has a ruling that only the Lord knows."(1)
Among the examples of these objections is: "The sixteenth: that wisdom is sought only in the case of one whose soul inclines towards bringing benefit or repelling harm, and the Lord, Exalted is He, is free from that."
The seventeenth: Wisdom is sought in the actions of one whose actions, if devoid of wisdom, would incur blame and be considered frivolous. And the Lord is exalted above that, as He is the one who acts in His dominion as He wills and chooses, without being questioned about what He does. As He, Exalted is He, said: { He is not to be questioned about what He does, but they will be questioned }(2), and even if His actions do not necessarily entail wisdom, that is what is sought"(3).
Al-Amidi responded to these last two objections: "Regarding the sixteenth objection, it is denied what they mentioned about the consideration of wisdom; rather, wisdom is sought in an action where, if wisdom were found in it, it would not be prohibited, but rather it would generally occur."
And regarding the seventeenth [point], what they mentioned is only necessary in the case of one for whom it is obligatory to consider wisdom in their actions, and the Exalted One is not like that, according to what is indicated in our theological writings."(4)
The evidence of the refuters:
__________
(1) The same source, 3/254.
(2) The Prophets, 23.
(3) Al-Amidi, al-Ihkam 3/254.
(4) Al-Amidi, al-Ihkam, 3/256.
