And he concluded by saying: "It has been established that the reasoning behind God's rulings (Exalted is He) based on public interests (maslaha) is invalid. This statement, while being an objection to what they have said, is also a definitive indication starting from the issue. Through this, the invalidity of all the arguments they relied upon becomes evident, as they are speculative proofs, while what we have mentioned is a conclusive argument. Then we say: If what you have mentioned indicates that the reasoning behind God's actions (Exalted is He) based on public interests is valid, then we have conclusive evidence that prevents it, which comes from the following aspects:" (1) He then mentioned these aspects, all of which pertain to the essence of God and have no connection to the science of usul al-fiqh (principles of jurisprudence). Among these aspects he mentioned:
"The first: that He is the Creator of the actions of the servants, and this prevents the claim that He - Exalted is He - takes into account the interests."(2)
"The second proof: that it is not permissible to justify the actions of Allah - Exalted is He - and His rulings by interests (masalih), is that if one is able to disbelieve but not able to believe, it would necessitate compulsion (jabr), and this undermines the consideration of interests."(3)
"The third evidence: that there has been an obligation imposed that is beyond one's capacity, and this prevents the assertion of taking into account public interests (maslaha)."(4)
Thus, all the aspects or proofs that he presented up to the last one, which is the eighth, where he said: "As for God (Exalted is He), since He is entirely free from interests and harms. Then we see that what predominates in His actions is that which does not serve the interests of creation, how can it be presumed that His actions and rulings are motivated by interests?!" (5).
__________
(1) The same source, 5/182.
(2) The same place.
(3) Al-Razi, Al-Mahsool, 5/186.
(4) The same place.
(5) The same source 5/193. I intended by presenting the arguments and objections of both al-Amidi and al-Razi to demonstrate that such a discussion is a logical and theological inquiry that falls outside the framework and objectives of usul al-fiqh (principles of jurisprudence), and that including it within usul al-fiqh is unjustified; rather, it is resorted to by those whose arguments are weak.
