These matters will become clear through analysis, investigation, and documentation in the upcoming chapters of this message. However, I will point out here what is necessary in this regard, in order to complete this topic.
Al-Shatibi says: "The obligations of the Sharia (sharia) relate to preserving its objectives in creation, and these objectives fall into three categories: the first is that they are necessary, the second is that they are needed, and the third is that they are embellishing"(1). And any objective in any of these categories is not established except if it is general and definitive, that is, universal, and not partial or speculative. He says: "The principles of jurisprudence (usul al-fiqh) in religion are definitive, not speculative, and the evidence for that is that they relate to the universals of the Sharia, and whatever is thus is definitive"(2). And he says in the same context: "By universals here, I mean the necessary, the needed, and the embellishing."
His explanation of his intent regarding the universals, and his stipulation of the necessity of certainty for them, confirms the requirement of certainty regarding the objectives (maqasid) in his view. He dismisses the notion that the foundational principles for which certainty is required are the general evidences: the Qur'an, the Sunnah, consensus (ijma), and analogy (qiyas). Rather, he asserts that these certain foundational principles are ultimately related to the universal objectives, which are necessities, needs, or enhancements.
Therefore, these definitions of the objectives (maqasid) are limited and incorrect. The more accurate statement - and Allah knows best - is to say: "The objectives are the goals, and the objectives of the Legislator (al-Shari) according to al-Shatibi are the goals indicated by actions, texts, and rulings as being desired to occur." Thus, actions and divine commands have specific goals, and the legal texts or the discourse surrounding them have goals of understanding and obligation. The rulings have goals that are adherence to them and not adhering to others, and some - but not all - of what results from this adherence.
__________
(1) al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/3, 4.
(2) The same source, 1/10.
