These actions, texts, and rulings serve as means in relation to the objectives (maqasid) or as causes in relation to the outcomes or effects. It must be noted here that not every effect resulting from a cause is intended by the legislator (shari). The mere fact that something is a result does not indicate that it is an end or an objective. For example, the marriage of a woman who has been divorced three times leads to her being lawful for the first husband if the second husband divorces her, but this legality is not an end or objective of the legislator, according to al-Shatibi, since marriage with this intention is prohibited. The end is a result and an effect, but not every result or effect is an end or an objective. This is central to al-Shatibi's ideas, and it will become clear in its place, if Allah wills.


Chapter Three


The Criteria of the Objectives of the Sharia (Maqasid al-Sharia) According to al-Shatibi


It contains a brief definition of the subject of this chapter and three sections:


The first section: ... in the introductions.
The second section: ... in the documents.
The third section: ... on the results and the concept of public interest (maslaha)
And the harm (mafsada) according to al-Shatibi.


Chapter Three
The Criteria of the Objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia) According to al-Shatibi


The topic of this chapter:
Al-Shatibi dedicated the second part of his book, al-Muwafaqat, to the topic of objectives (maqasid), and he divided the objectives into two categories: the objectives of the Legislator (al-Shari) and the objectives of the obligated (al-Mukallaf). As for the first part of al-Muwafaqat, he titled it the Book of Rulings (Kitab al-Ahkam), in which he discussed the legal rulings, the rulings of obligation and the rulings of status.
The topics that he highlighted in the Book of Rulings (al-Ahkam) were discussed by the imams of usul (usul al-fiqh) before him, and among them are some new aspects. The novelty lies in the perspective on these rulings, whether obligatory, recommended, permissible, disliked, or prohibited, as well as the cause, condition, impediment, firm ruling, concession, validity, corruption, and nullity. This perspective serves the idea of the objectives of the Legislator (maqasid al-sharia) and addresses any objections or refutations against them. Thus, he establishes principles for understanding these rulings and their meanings or objectives. In addition to this, before he begins the Book of Rulings, he presents thirteen introductions, which he considers necessary for understanding his book.
