In fact, there is no principle that he discusses in his book al-Muwafaqat except that it has a share of those introductions.

For the sake of these introductions and principles, this chapter was made, and I have divided it into three sections. The first is about the necessary introductions for the idea of the objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia), the second is about the references or principles that he highlighted in his discussion of rulings, and the third concerns the results and meanings that arise from these principles and introductions, which includes a discussion on the meaning of public interest (maslaha) and harm (mafsada) according to al-Shatibi. This is essential for understanding al-Shatibi's methodology.

The first section
On the introductions

The subject of this section:
Al-Shatibi divided his book (al-Muwafaqat) into five sections. He began by mentioning the introductions that he considers necessary for understanding his book. He said: "Thus, the book is confined to five sections, the first of which is about the scientific introductions needed to lay the groundwork for the intended goal" (1). He then laid out thirteen introductions. In order to highlight what is necessary from these introductions to clarify his methodology or idea, this section was created.
The principles of jurisprudence are definitive:
Al-Shatibi stated in his first introduction: "The principles of jurisprudence in religion are definitive, not speculative, and the evidence for this is that they pertain to the universals of the Sharia, and whatever is thus is definitive" (2). He then established his proof for this introduction, and among the things he said was: "If it were permissible for speculation to be attached to the universals of the Sharia, it would also be permissible for it to be attached to the foundation of the Sharia (3) since it is the first universal. This is not usually permissible, and by universals here, I mean the necessities, needs, and enhancements. Also, if speculation were permissible regarding the foundation of the Sharia, then doubt could be attached to it, which is not the case, and it would be permissible to change and alter it, which contradicts what Allah, Exalted is He, has guaranteed regarding its preservation" (4). He also said: "If it were permissible to make the speculative a foundation in the principles of jurisprudence, it would be permissible to make it a foundation in the principles of religion, and this is not the case by consensus" (5).
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat. 1/7. From the preface of the book.
(2) The same source, 1/10 from the first introduction.
(3) What he means by the foundation of the Sharia: the Noble Qur'an. And Allah knows best.
(4) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat. 1/10.
(5) The same location.
