One of the most important introductions to al-Shatibi's methodology is his third introduction, where he says: "The relied-upon intention (qasd al-awwal) is the legal evidences, and the existence of certainty in them regarding the commonly accepted usage is nonexistent or extremely rare, I mean in the singular evidences. If they are from the reports of singular narrators, then their failure to convey certainty is evident. And if they are mutawatir (consecutively transmitted), then their conveying of certainty is contingent upon premises, all or most of which are speculative. What is contingent upon the speculative must necessarily be speculative. For they depend on the transmission of languages, grammatical opinions, the absence of ambiguity, the absence of metaphorical usage, and both legal and ordinary transmission, as well as implicit meanings, specification of the general, restriction of the unrestricted, the absence of abrogation, precedence and postponement, and rational opposition. The conveyance of certainty while considering these matters is impossible." Thus, al-Shatibi denies the existence of definitive evidence from singular texts, even if they are from the texts of the Noble Qur'an or mutawatir hadith. And if we know his condition for certainty with respect to the principles of jurisprudence (usul al-fiqh), a question arises: how will this certainty be attained in his view? He says: "The conveyance of certainty while considering these matters is impossible, and those who claim its existence have relied on the fact that they are speculative in themselves, but if they are accompanied by observable or transmitted corroborative evidence, they may convey certainty, and all of this is rare or impossible. Rather, the acceptable evidences here are those derived from a collection of speculative evidences that converge on a single meaning until they convey certainty in it, for the strength of convergence is greater than that of divergence, and for this reason, mutawatir conveys certainty; this is a type of it. If a collection of evidences on the matter is obtained that conveys knowledge, then it is the required evidence, and it is similar to the moral mutawatir, rather it is like the knowledge of the bravery of Ali (may Allah be pleased with him) and the existence of Hatim, derived from the multitude of incidents reported about them."
__________
(1) The relied-upon intention: that is, when the command or prohibition comes from the legislator. The execution of the action is the relied-upon intention of the command, and refraining from it is the relied-upon intention of the prohibition.
(2) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat. 1/14.
(3) Conveys knowledge: that is, conveys definitive knowledge. Knowledge is opposed to speculation.
(4) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat 1/14.
