"And knowledge is beauty, wealth, and a rank that is unmatched by any other rank" (1).
Then he said: "Knowledge may be sought for the sake of enjoyment and the pleasure of conversing about it, especially the sciences that allow for intellectual engagement and where there is ample room for contemplation of its aspects, and where the path to deducing the known from the unknown is broad. However, each of these pursuits is either a servant of the original intention or not. If it serves that intention, then the pursuit of it from the outset is correct... If it does not serve that intention, then the pursuit of it from the outset is incorrect, such as seeking knowledge for ostentation, to argue with the foolish, to boast among the scholars, to win the hearts of people, or to gain from their worldly affairs" (2). He also said: "The legal objectives (maqasid) are of two types: original objectives and subsidiary objectives. As for the original objectives, they have no share for the obligated person" (3). He said: "As for the subsidiary objectives, they take into account the share of the obligated person, and from them, he obtains what is in accordance with his natural inclination towards fulfilling desires, enjoying permissible things, and fulfilling needs" (4).
Al-Shatibi refers to the subsidiary objectives as those that the rulings lead to, which the servant is inclined towards by nature and instinct. The consideration of these objectives, whether accepted or rejected, depends on whether they are a means to the primary objective or not. If they are a means to the primary objective or serve it, then they are a subsidiary legal objective; if they are not, then they are not an objective for the legislator, although they may be an objective for the obligated person. If they oppose the primary objective, then they are forbidden.
Characteristics of the universals:
__________
(1) The same source, 1/35.
(2) The same source, 1/36.
(3) The same source, 2/120.
(4) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/124.
