They attributed contradiction to al-Shatibi when he said that particulars are not included in preservation while branches are preserved. This is another error on their part that indicates their failure to distinguish between the particular (juz'i) and the branch (far') in al-Shatibi's methodology. See: al-Muwafaqat, 1/12 and 1/44 from the edition of Sheikh al-Tunisi. And 1/32 from the edition of Dr. Daraz. And 1/22 and 1/107 from the edition of Abu Ubaida.
Al-Shatibi dedicated the second section of his book al-Muwafaqat to discussing legal rulings (ahkam shar'iyya), which either pertain to the address of obligation (khitab al-taklif) or the address of status (khitab al-wad'). The address of obligation has five types: obligatory (wajib or fard), recommended (mandub), permissible (mubah), disliked (makruh), and forbidden (haram). The address of status has five types: cause (sabab), condition (shart), impediment (mani'), validity and invalidity (sihha wa fasad), and concession and obligation (rukhsah wa azimah).
Al-Shatibi discussed these types in his book on rulings (1), elaborating particularly on the address of obligation in relation to the permissible (mubah), and regarding the address of status in relation to the cause and the concession and obligation.
This is due to the impact these rulings have on his concept of objectives (maqasid). If we understand that his idea is based on the premise that all legal rulings return to general principles of public interest (maslaha), then the permissible, which is a legal ruling of obligation, meaning what the legislator has allowed between action and inaction, contradicts this principle and undermines his idea, which he views as a definitive general principle. For permission to act means that there is a public interest intended by the legislator, and permission to refrain means that the legislator does not intend the existence of that public interest, and this is a contradiction that undermines the idea that all rulings have objectives or maqasid.
Therefore, al-Shatibi directs attention to the permissible in a different way. He states that the choice in the permissible is in terms of its being particular, and this does not undermine the idea because the public interests apply to the general principles and not to particulars, and in general principles, there is no choice. Thus, the permissible is permissible in the particular but is required to be acted upon or required to be refrained from in the general. The same applies to concession and obligation, as the ruling on taking the concession or refraining from it is permissibility; if both taking the concession and adhering to the obligation are permissible, then where is the public interest? Is it in taking the concession or in adhering to the obligation? This is why al-Shatibi's discussion on the permissible and the concession is extensive, in order to maintain the integrity of his idea.
__________
(1) al-Muwafaqat, 1/68 and onwards.
