He points to the food shortage, saying: "As indicated by another inquiry, the food shortage drove them to exploit the maritime resource, but the charter of the ships was made without the wage being known at the time of the contract. They wondered: how could this be when the situation in the Andalusian region is not hidden, or its need for food, and most of its food now comes from the sea, and many of the people of the region seek to cause the establishment of a ship or to buy one, yet they are prevented from that by the chartering in the aforementioned manner, while the situation in the homeland is not concealed and the necessity is evident" (1).
Among the indicators of economic weakness is the state's inability to meet the needs of the people and its need to impose taxes. This is evident in the differing opinions of the scholars, as due to the political conditions and external wars, a financial crisis befell the state. The government of Granada consulted the jurists regarding the permissibility of imposing additional taxes on the people of the kingdom to meet the mobilization for combat, but they refrained from that. However, al-Shatibi deviated from their consensus and issued a fatwa permitting it, saying: "If we appoint an obeyed Imam, in need of increasing the soldiers to defend the borders and protect the kingdom that spans vast territories, and the treasury is empty while the needs of the soldiers rise to what is insufficient for them, then it is permissible for the Imam, if he is just, to impose on the wealthy what he deems sufficient for them in wealth until the treasury's funds become apparent. Then he has the discretion to impose that on the crops, fruits, and other things so that the specification of people does not lead to estrangement of hearts, and this occurs rarely in many cases such that it does not harm anyone and achieves the intended goal" (2).
__________
(1) Same reference, p. 14.
(2) Al-Shatibi, al-I'tisam, 2/380. Edited by Abdul Razzaq al-Mahdi, Dar al-Kitab al-Arabi, 2nd ed., 1418 AH - 1998 CE.
