Every objective must be absolute and definitive, and it should serve and affirm the necessary objectives, which are: the preservation of religion, life, intellect, lineage, and wealth. The embellishments serve the necessities, and both serve the essentials.
The legal rulings (ahkam shar'iyya) must refer to one of the enhancing (tahsiniyya), need-based (hajiyya), or necessary (daruriyya) principles, meaning that the objective of each ruling must support or serve a benefit (maslaha) that has been established through comprehensive and definitive induction in one of the three categories. If the ruling's return to any principle does not become apparent, then it is either to be rejected or suspended.
The meaning of the statement that the Sharia (law) came for the interests of the servants is that there is no ruling that does not bring benefit to the servants, even if it does not result in harm. The notion of the existence of such a ruling implies that it is futile, and there is no futility in the Sharia.
The action required by Islamic law, whether obligatory or recommended, serves a universal principle or more than one of the principles that are the objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia).
The action that is prohibited by Islamic law, whether it is forbidden (haram) or disliked (makruh), undermines or serves to undermine a fundamental original principle or more than one of the principles that are the objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia) or interests (masalih).
With these principles or rules regarding the concept of objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia), al-Shatibi's discussion of what is permissible (mubah) is directed.
If it is said that what is permissible (mubah) is what the legislator has left to choice between action and inaction, or it is what neither the doer is blamed nor praised for, nor is the one who refrains from it blamed or praised, or it is what is equal in both action and inaction according to the legislator, or what the textual evidence indicates regarding the legislator's address to choose between action and inaction, or something similar to these statements, then this is problematic according to those principles. This is because action has a purpose, and refraining from it misses that purpose. If the intended purpose is achieved by refraining from the action, then performing it would miss that purpose. And if the rulings were legislated only for the benefit of the servants, then it is necessary to prefer one side over the other, or to claim the existence of a fourth level beyond the enhancements that is characterized by not serving any of the three levels nor undermining any of them. However, this claim contradicts al-Shatibi's idea that no legal ruling is devoid of an objective, whether it is to bring about a benefit or to avert harm. So how does al-Shatibi resolve this problem?
