Thus, there are two types of what is permissible (mubah): one that signifies the choice between action and inaction, which is the action that is required in totality, and one that signifies the lifting of hardship, which is the inaction that is required in totality. However, its being permissible continues to oscillate around the fundamental idea of the objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia) or the purposefulness of rulings with skepticism. Al-Shatibi explores what might cast doubt on his idea, stating that the permissible in the sense of choice is, from one perspective, partial, and its existence is theoretical; whereas practically, it is the action that is required. As for the permissible in the sense of lifting hardship, the interest (maslaha) lies in leaving it, since it is required to be left entirely. So how can it be permitted when acting upon it negates the interest? Here, al-Shatibi asserts the possibility of a sixth rank of rulings, which is the rank of pardon, and this rank seems to resolve the issue of particulars that do not serve the idea of objectives.
Regarding the permissible that signifies choice, al-Shatibi believes that an action, in its essence, has a rationality in the mind, and it has a reality that differs from its rationality. When it occurs, it does not occur in isolation from circumstances or attributes. For example: walking is permissible, looking is permissible, eating is permissible, and lying down is permissible; however, this ruling pertains to the action as an action, that is, as walking, looking, eating, or lying down. In reality, walking may be towards an act of worship or towards a sin, and the same applies to looking; eating may be for what is permissible or for what is forbidden, and it may occur out of necessity or not. The act of lying down varies in its reality based on circumstances. Actions in reality do not occur without attributes, so should one consider the action from the perspective of its rationality or from the perspective of attributes? He chooses the latter and states: "The purpose of establishing the evidence is to apply the actions of the obligated individuals according to their nature, and there is no dispute in this. However, the actions of the obligated individuals have two considerations: one from the perspective of their rationality and the other from the perspective of their occurrence in the external world" (1). He then says: "If that is the case, then the consideration should be based on what has occurred in the external world, which consists only of actions described by necessary attributes and matters contrary to that. Every obligated individual is addressed in relation to their specific self; thus, they are addressed by what is valid for them to achieve in the external world, which cannot happen except through external necessities; thus, they are addressed by them and not by anything else" (2).
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat. 3/17.
(2) The same source, 3/19.
