As for what is permissible (mubah) in the sense of lifting hardship, it is required to be abandoned entirely, and granting permission for it undermines or contradicts the universals. Therefore, al-Shatibi says: "As for the category in which there is no hardship, it is almost akin to following the blameworthy whims; do you not see that it is almost contrary to the intent of the Legislator in seeking the general prohibition in principle? However, due to its scarcity, lack of permanence, and its participation with the servant required to act by chance, as mentioned in its place, it has not been given much attention" (1). Then al-Shatibi mentions that although particulars may oppose the universals, they do not affect them because the universals are established with certainty, and the particulars that oppose the objectives of public interest (maslaha) do not reach the level of universals; thus, they do not undermine the fundamental idea of the objectives. He states: "The particular (2) does not undermine a required principle (3), and although it may open the door in general, it is not influential in itself as a particular, until it combines with others of its kind, and the combination is strengthening (4), and from there the universal that is prohibited, which is contrary to the desired action, is formed" (5). Therefore, if these particulars come together in a universal that encompasses them and returns to it, they will no longer be permissible in the sense of mubah, but will instead be required to be abandoned both partially and universally. However, in reality - according to al-Shatibi's view - they are particulars and do not return to a universal, while at the same time serving to undermine the idea of the objectives.
__________
(1) The same source, 1/96.
(2) That is: from the permissible included under the category of lifting hardship.
(3) It will come in our discussion of the objectives that the particular does not undermine the universal even if it opposes it, because if the particular does not return to a universal, it can be interpreted or rejected.
(4) That is, it does not have an effect until it combines with others and provides a significant consensus; then it becomes universal and must be considered in specifying the universals, but prior to that, it is not considered even if it opens the door for consideration.
(5) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat. 1/96.
