It should not be said here that this exception is a case of specifying the general, known in the science of usul (principles of jurisprudence), for this specification contradicts the idea of universals and their properties mentioned by al-Shatibi, including his statement: "You will not find in it, after its perfection, any abrogation or specification of its generality, nor any restriction of its absoluteness, nor the lifting of a ruling from its rulings, neither in terms of the generality of the obligated nor in terms of the specificity of some of them, nor in terms of time over time, nor in terms of condition over condition" (1). It will become clear in the discussion of generality and specificity that specification, in the sense of exception or lifting some of what the text encompasses, is rejected by al-Shatibi; rather, specification for him is the clarification of the meaning of the text, that is, what the general term encompasses. Accordingly, the concessions do not belong to universal principles. He said: "The fact that this legislation is for an excuse that is an exception from a universal principle indicates to you that concessions are not legislated from the outset; therefore, they are not universals, even if they are presented with that, it is incidental" (2).
And there may be those who say: Concessions return to the individual with benefit, as they are justified by hardship, and they implement a universal principle, which is the principle of lifting hardship, like the hardship for the traveler, or for the principle of preserving life, like eating carrion for the one in dire need, or for a complementary principle, like the sitting prayer of the followers when the imam prays sitting, or other such universal principles (3).
__________
(1) The same source, 1/46. And see p. 144 of this book.
(2) The same source, 1/211.
(3) Lifting hardship and not obligating with burdensome difficulties are among the universal principles and belong to the rank of needs. Preserving life is a universal principle that belongs to the rank of necessities. The sitting prayer of the followers due to the imam praying sitting refers to a universal principle of the complements of necessities. Al-Muwafaqat, 1/209 - 211.
