But al-Shatibi establishes a new understanding, and he sees that the legal universals (kulliyat al-sharia) are, although they are either legislative or established by the Lawgiver, equivalent to the rational universals (kulliyat al-aqliyya), because these are also established by the Lawgiver. He says: "The legislative matters may parallel the rational matters in providing certain knowledge, and the knowledge of the Sharia is among them" (1). He also states: "Moreover, the rational universals are derived from existence, which is a legislative matter and not a rational one, thus they are equal to the legal universals in this regard, and the distinction between them is lifted" (2).
And since causes have their effects, and whoever intends to bring about a matter aims to establish its causes, the doer of the cause is considered like the doer of the effect. Thus, the legal rulings are considered causes for effects intended by them. Al-Shatibi said: "Establishing the cause is akin to establishing the effect, whether that effect is intended or not. Because when it is made a cause in the course of customs, it is regarded as if he directly caused it. This is supported by the principle of customary practices, as the relationship of effects to their causes is like that of satiety to food, quenching to water, burning to fire, and purging to scammony(3) and all other effects to their causes. Likewise, the actions that result from our earning are attributed to us even if they are not from our earning, and if this is well-known and established, the custom of the Sharia follows this measure in legal causes with their effects" (4).
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat 1/44. See p. 144 of this book.
(2) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 1/44.
(3) [Illegible]: A plant from which a sticky moisture is extracted, dried, and is also named after its plant; it is more effective against the stomach and intestines than all laxatives. Al-Firozabadi, al-Qamus al-Muhit. p. 1447.
(4) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 1/148.
