In addition to that, some of the wisdoms may not be perceived or anticipated by a person, even though they may be the most important objective for the legislator. Among the outcomes, a person may feel that there is a worldly benefit for him and may naturally incline towards it, and this is what al-Shatibi refers to as the aim or the share. Therefore, the mere assumption of wisdom, in which the mind wanders, is not to be considered until it is established through the Sharia. He says: "If transmission (naql) and reason ('aql) collaborate on legal issues, it is on the condition that transmission precedes and is followed, while reason is subordinate; thus, the mind should only explore within the limits set by transmission" (1).
He also says: "If we understand through necessity or choice an independent wisdom in the legislation of the ruling, it does not follow that there is not another wisdom and a second and third benefit, and more. Our ultimate understanding is that we have grasped a worldly benefit that is suitable to independently justify the legislation of the ruling, so we consider it under the ruling of legal permission, and we do not know that the benefit and wisdom are limited to what has appeared. If we do not attain knowledge or suspicion from that, we cannot decisively claim that there is no benefit except what has appeared to us. For that is a decisive claim about the unseen without evidence" (2).
It is apparent from this text that it is a response to those who assert the establishment of the cause, wisdom, or benefit, based on its being probable, even though there may be others that have not appeared to us which are stronger in assumption. It seems to be a direct rebuttal to al-Amidi, who said: "If it is established that the rulings were legislated for the benefits of the servants, then if we see a ruling that entails a beneficial matter, it must either be that this is the aim of the legislation of the ruling or something that has not been revealed to us. It cannot be what has not been revealed to us; otherwise, the legislation of the ruling would be merely an act of devotion, which contradicts the principle previously established. Thus, it must be legislated for what has appeared, and if that is presumed, it must be acted upon" (3).
__________
(1) Al-Muwafaqat. 1/53.
(2) The same source, 2/216.
(3) Al-Amidi, Al-Ahkam fi Usul Al-Ahkam. 3/250.
