He said: "If Allah had willed, He would have imposed it upon us while we turn away from worldly gains, or He would have imposed it upon us while stripping us of the innate inclinations. However, He has bestowed upon His servants what He made a means to what He intended for the cultivation of this world for the Hereafter, and He made the pursuit of these gains permissible, not prohibited, but according to legal regulations that are more effective in terms of benefit (maslaha) and more enduring than what the servant considers to be beneficial { and Allah knows, while you do not know } (1). If He had willed, He could have prevented us from seeking the gains of the Hereafter, for He is the Owner and has the ultimate argument, but He encouraged us to fulfill the rights that are obligatory upon us with the promise of a share for us, and He hastened for us many shares from that which we enjoy on the path of what we have been commanded" (2).
Based on this, al-Shatibi's concept of benefits and harms is that the legal rulings were established for specific purposes. The action required by the Sharia has a desired purpose or purposes, and the action that is prohibited has results that are desired to be absent. These purposes of the rulings are the objectives of the legislator, and since they are objectives of the legislator, what is sought from them is called benefit (maslaha), and what is intended to be avoided is called harm (mafsada), whether it is appropriate or not.
Moreover, among the terms that one should be attentive to their meanings according to al-Shatibi are the terms particular (جزئي) and branch (فرع), and the meaning of returning to the definitive (قطعي), due to the differences in their meanings according to him compared to what may come to the reader's mind. The meanings of these terms have been clarified by him in the first section of this chapter.

Chapter Four
The Intention of the Legislator
In Establishing the Sharia from the Beginning
And in Establishing it for Understanding

... It contains an introduction and three sections:

Section One: ... The Intention of the Legislator in Establishing the Sharia from the Beginning.
Section Two: ... The Infalibility of the Sharia.
Section Three: ... The Intention of the Legislator in Establishing the Sharia for Understanding.

Chapter Four
The Intention of the Legislator in Establishing the Sharia from the Beginning
And in Establishing it for Understanding

Introduction:
__________
(1) Surah Al-Baqarah, 216.
(2) Al-Shatibi, Al-Muwafaqat. 2/123.
