The assertion of objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia), and the varying ranks of these objectives, does not justify the violation or alteration of certain rulings under the pretext of preserving their objectives, nor does it justify neglecting some objectives in order to attain what is higher in rank. This is because the universals cannot be preserved by every means, but only by what Allah has legislated for them. Thus, violating the rulings undermines the objectives even if this is not apparent. The particulars and complements in the Sharia were legislated to preserve the necessities, and they serve them. Therefore, the preservation of the necessities can only be achieved through them. Accordingly, what some may occasionally present as opinions or fatwas that disregard the textual evidence under the pretext of preserving the objectives and claim the permissibility of developing or changing the legal rulings based on that are statements that contradict the idea of objectives according to al-Shatibi. He previously stated that those who sought to preserve the universals based on their rational perspectives failed to do so and ended up neglecting the interests and undermining their foundations. He also says: "Every necessary and complementary matter is merely a servant of the essential necessity and a comfort and enhancement of its specific form... In every case, it revolves around serving it, so it is more likely that the necessity will be fulfilled in its best state" (1). He states: "Since each of these ranks is different in the degree of consideration, the necessities are the most emphasized, followed by the needs and then the enhancements. And since they are interconnected, the invalidation of the lighter one is a boldness towards what is more emphasized and a means of disrupting it. Thus, the lighter one is as if it is a protection for the more emphasized, and the one grazing around the protection is close to falling into it" (2). He further states: "If the necessity can be disrupted by the disruption of its complements, then preserving them for its sake is required" (3).
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/42.
(2) The same source, 2/12 - 13.
(3) The same source, 2/15.
