He says regarding the change of rulings under the pretext of public interest (maslaha) or objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia): "If they (i.e., the interests) were established in such a way that their system could be disrupted or their rulings could be invalidated, then legislation would not be based on them(1). For their being interests at that point is no more valid than their being harms, but the Legislator intends for them to be interests in all cases, so their establishment must be in that manner eternally, universally, and generally in all types of obligations and for all obligated individuals and in all circumstances, and thus we have found the matter in it, and all praise is due to Allah"(2).
Interpretation of Some Texts of al-Shatibi:
Many contemporary scholars have approached the texts of the Muwafaqat without paying attention to the true meanings of their content, attributing to al-Shatibi opinions that he does not hold, but rather refutes and clarifies their invalidity. In reality, many of al-Shatibi's texts, if not viewed based on the premises he established and the principles he articulated, and in such a way that the subsequent texts build upon the preceding ones, will lead to ambiguities and suggest contradictions between some of the texts.
Some of the scholars of usul (principles of jurisprudence) have produced reports that hold no value in Sharia, mistakenly believing that they are relying on the idea of the objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia), like one who claims that wherever there is public interest (maslaha), there is the law of Allah, or that the path to what is permissible (mubah) is permissible, or like one who says that Allah has prohibited what our minds perceive as harmful and permitted what our minds perceive as beneficial, or something similar to that.
And if some do this claiming to rely on al-Shatibi, there are those who have realized that al-Shatibi's ideas do not apply to these meanings. Sheikh Muhammad al-Tahir ibn Ashour - for example - points out, in the context of his assertion that the Sharia is based on the interests of the servants, that most of al-Shatibi's arguments on this matter are invalid. This is due to the fact that what is being argued for according to al-Shatibi is different from what is held by the Sheikh(3).
Therefore, Dr. Abdullah Daraz saw a contradiction between some texts of al-Shatibi.
__________
(1) That is, for the purpose of achieving them, because they are objectives, and the legal rulings are the means to them, or the rulings are causes and the interests are the effects.
(2) al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/25.
(3) See p. 181 of this book.
