Al-Shatibi says in the fifth issue of the first type of the objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia): "The interests (masalih) spread in this world are considered from two perspectives: from the perspective of their existence and from the perspective of the attachment of the legal ruling to them. As for the first perspective: the worldly interests, in terms of their existence here, cannot be purely considered as interests. By interests, I mean those that pertain to the sustenance of human life, the completeness of his existence, and the fulfillment of his sensual and rational attributes in general, so that he is in a state of abundance in every respect. This, in mere habitual terms, cannot be the case because those interests are mixed with obligations and hardships, whether few or many, and are accompanied by, preceded by, or followed by matters such as eating, drinking, clothing, housing, riding, marriage, and others. These matters can only be attained through effort and toil. Likewise, worldly harms (mafasid) are not purely harms in terms of their existence, as there is no harm that is typically imposed without being accompanied by or preceded by much kindness, gentleness, and enjoyment of pleasures. If that is the case, then the interests and harms related to this world are understood according to what predominates. If the predominant aspect is an interest, then it is the understood interest by common consent; if the other aspect predominates, then it is the understood harm by common consent. Therefore, an action with dual aspects is attributed to the predominant side... according to what is customary in similar cases... As for the second perspective regarding the attachment of the legal ruling to them, if the interest is predominant when compared to the harm in terms of habitual judgment, it is the one intended by the Sharia. For its attainment, the demand upon the servants has arisen... If it is followed by a harm or hardship, it is not intended in the legality of that action and its demand. Similarly, if the harm is predominant in relation to the interest in habitual judgment, then its removal is the intended goal in the Sharia, and for this reason, prohibition has been established... If it is followed by an interest or pleasure, it is not the intended goal of the prohibition of that action, but rather the intended goal is what predominates in the situation."(1)
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat. 2/15 - 16 - 17.
