He says that the purchase of grapes, weapons, or a slave, for example, may be for a legitimate purpose (maqasid al-sharia) or for something forbidden (haram). In the first case, it is a benefit (maslaha), and in the second, it is a harm (mafsada). How can one judge which side should be favored over the other when the intention of the actor is hidden from others? In this sense, al-Shatibi speaks of the authority of custom and habit unless the intention of a specific actor is known to be otherwise. He states: "That some benefits are lawful (halal) and some are forbidden (haram) is where the main consideration of the issue lies... that one side is the primary intended purpose by custom, while the other side is a secondary, unintended purpose by habit, unless it is specifically intended and contrary to the norm. There is no doubt that the ruling is for what is primarily intended by custom, while the other has no ruling because if we were to consider the secondary side, it would not be permissible for us to own any of the items or to contract over them, as they contain forbidden benefits... An example of the primacy of lawful benefits is the purchase of a slave with the intention of converting her to Islam for prostitution, purchasing a boy for immoral acts, and buying grapes to turn into wine or weapons to rob... An example of the primacy of forbidden benefits is the purchase of a dog for hunting... and buying wine for vinegar-making and buying the fat of carrion to coat ships or to light for people... If the secondary purpose becomes predominant in intention and precedes in the custom of certain times until what was originally intended becomes as if it were nonexistent, then the ruling reverses. I do not think this can happen in such a general way, but if its occurrence is assumed, the ruling would reverse" (1). More details on this matter will come when discussing the principle of the original and the predominant within the discussion of the principle of blocking the means (sadd al-dhara'i) in chapter nine.
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 3/107 - 108 - 109.
