He says: "Indeed, some people have strayed due to neglecting the evidence and relying on men, thus departing from the path of the Companions and the Followers, and they followed their desires without knowledge, leading them away from the straight path" (1). He mentioned examples of this, including: "The opinion of the blind followers of an Imam who claim that their Imam is the Sharia, to the extent that they are averse to attributing any virtue to any scholar other than their Imam. So when someone reaches the level of ijtihad (independent juristic reasoning) and speaks on issues without being linked to their Imam, they criticize him and direct arrows of criticism at him, considering him among those who have deviated from the path (2), and those who have separated from the community without any evidence from them, but merely based on popular habit. Imam Baqi ibn Makhlad encountered this type of people when he entered Andalusia coming from the East, to the extent that they made him an outcast in the courtyard and marginalized him... Among them is the opinion of the Nabat (a sect) in these times who turned away from studying the knowledge they intended to discuss and act upon, then returned to following some of the shaykhs from whom they learned in their youth, a time when one is likely to lack scrutiny of the one from whom they take knowledge or to be negligent of the one from whom they received it. They then elevated those shaykhs to the highest degrees of perfection and attributed to them what they have been attributed in error, or they understood from them without verification or inquiry into the authenticity of the reported issue, and they rejected all that was transmitted from the earlier generations that is true and correct... So reflect, O people of understanding, on the state of relying on a man for fatwa (legal opinion) without seeking the legal evidence, but merely for immediate interest. May Allah protect us from that by His grace" (3).
__________
(1) The same source, 1/537.
(2) The path: the main road. See: al-Firuzabadi, al-Qamus al-Muhit, p. 347.
(3) al-Shatibi, al-I'tisam, 2/538-542.
