It is also directed at al-Qarafi, as he presented a problem that is considered a refutation of the idea of reasoning based on public interest (maslaha), and it is necessary for all who consider public interests and harms. Al-Shatibi says: "Indeed, al-Qarafi raised a problem regarding public interests and harms and did not respond to it, and it is, for him, necessary for all scholars who consider public interests and harms"(1). Al-Qarafi established that this problem applies to everyone, including the Mu'tazila and others, saying (and the statement is attributed to al-Qarafi): "Because deviating from the principle of public interest and harm is rejected by the principles of the Mu'tazila, for it is foolishness, and they cannot say that the criterion for this is that every public interest for which Allah has threatened punishment for neglecting it, and every harm for which Allah has threatened punishment for committing it, is the intended goal, and what Allah has neglected is not included in our objective"(2). Al-Qarafi's intention here is that the existence of rulings that do not follow the principle of public interests and harms refutes the idea, and he adds (al-Qarafi): "For we say that the threat in your view and the obligation is contingent upon public interest and harm, and it must be, according to you, rationally that Allah threatens punishment for neglecting public interests and committing harms. If you derived the considered public interests and harms from the threat, it would necessitate circular reasoning, and if the derivation in(3) public interests and harms were valid, it would require you to allow that the obligation could come from neglecting public interests and committing harms, and the realities would then be inverted, for what is considered is the obligation, so whatever Allah has commanded is a public interest, and this invalidates your principle"(4). As for those who are not Mu'tazila, who affirm the causality of bringing about public interests and averting harms, al-Qarafi presents them with the following problem: "As for our companions' share of this problem, it is that it becomes impossible for them to say: 'Indeed, Allah, Exalted is He, has taken into account absolute public interest and absolute harm... Rather, their way is only to extrapolate from specific instances, and although this detracts from a certain pattern of insight into some of the secrets of jurisprudence, they say: Allah does what He wills and rules as He desires, and Allah considers what He wills and leaves what He wills, nothing more"(5).
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/28.
(2) The same source.
(3) Thus is the text. It may be more accurate to say: from.
(4) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, p. 29.
(5) The same source.
