Al-Shatibi says, objecting to the statements of Ibn Abd al-Salam: "Some people have said that the interests of the Hereafter can only be known through the Sharia, while those of this world can be known through necessities, experiences, customs, and conjectures" (1). He then states: "As for the claim that what pertains to the Hereafter can only be known through the Sharia, that is as he said. However, what he said regarding worldly matters is not entirely accurate, and if it were as he claimed, there would be no need to refer to the Sharia except for the dissemination of the interests of the Hereafter specifically, which is not the case... Custom prevents the independent intellects in this world from discerning their interests and harms in detail, unless this speaker intends that knowledge of them is obtained through experiences and others after the Sharia has established its principles, and there is no dispute about that" (2).
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/30 - 31.
(2) The same source. These statements that al-Shatibi attributed to Ibn Abd al-Salam suggest that the latter is a Mu'tazili, especially since al-Shatibi did not mention the name of the speaker. Dr. Daraz commented on these statements by saying: "It resembles the doctrine of the Mu'tazila." See Dr. Daraz's commentary 2/48 from al-Muwafaqat, Dar al-Ma'rifah edition. However, from the words of Ibn Abd al-Salam: "Indeed, Allah, Exalted is He, is not obligated to bring about the interests of the good nor to avert the harms of the evil, just as He is not obligated to create, provide sustenance, impose duties, reward, or punish. Rather, He brings about the interests of the good and averts the harms of the evil out of grace towards His servants. If the matter were reversed, it would not be wrong, for there is no constraint upon Him" (Qawaid al-Ahkam, 1/10). Among other things, Ibn Abd al-Salam said: "And Allah, Exalted is He, has commanded the establishment of harmonious interests and excluded some from that command. He has prohibited similar harms and excluded some from that prohibition" (Qawaid al-Ahkam, 1/6). This confirms the existence of the issue mentioned by his student al-Qarafi.
