Then he says: "It has become clear that there is a conflict of evidence in the issue, and it has appeared that the stronger position from both sides is that of the prohibitors, thus the situation necessitates that the second position, which indicates the derivative meaning, has no indication of an additional legal ruling whatsoever" (1).
The summary of the evidence of the prohibitors is that these derivative meanings are either indicated by the text or they are not. If they are indicated by the text, then they are among the original meanings and are considered valid, and can be used as evidence for rulings because they are among the indications of language. If they are not indicated by the text, then the one who claims them is required to provide legal evidence. If there is no legal text that indicates them in any type of linguistic indication, then they are mere conjectures and assumptions that cannot be attributed to the Sharia. In reality, this disagreement that al-Shatibi raises and clarifies his position on is the disagreement mentioned in the second chapter between those who advocate for reasoning based on presumed wisdom, and building rulings upon it on the grounds that they are conjectures, which are acceptable in legal matters, and those who reject considering these meanings and rulings based on the fact that there is no evidence for them, thus they hold no validity, as they describe them as mere figments of the heart or whims of the mind.
From here, al-Shatibi's approach to this issue is that these meanings hold no validity in legislation as they are presumed rulings, and there is nothing to prevent the intended wisdom from being something else. There is also nothing to prevent it from being the opposite of the intended wisdom of the legislator, but a person may perceive the ugly as beautiful or the beautiful as ugly.
Thus, al-Shatibi's condition for a beneficial induction that leads to certainty in considering these meanings as legal objectives is that it establishes for him the compatibility of this meaning with the actions of the Sharia (2).
However, the reader of al-Shatibi may wonder whether what al-Shatibi asserts, that such an induction is beneficial in considering these meanings with certainty, is correct?
__________
(1) The same location.
(2) Now, the reader can refer to the reading of the third introduction from al-Shatibi's introductions, to gain more confidence in what we have presented to him regarding his methodology, and to increase his understanding of the importance of that introduction and what it contains for his methodology.
