If the secondary meanings in individual texts are not considered, from where will the consideration arise if the texts are numerous? In other words, if the consideration of meaning depends on the convergence of evidence on that meaning, from where will the consideration arise if none of this evidence has any indication of that meaning? This is according to his statement, "The situation necessitates that the second aspect, which indicates the secondary meaning, has no indication of a legal ruling whatsoever."

Among al-Shatibi's statements regarding the exaggeration in rejecting the consideration of meanings that may be claimed to be intended by the Legislator without any evidence indicating them, either through original indication or through established induction, is his saying: "What assures us from Allah's questioning us on the Day of Resurrection: From where did you understand that I intended such and such a genus by what I revealed in my saying: { And they think that they are doing well } (1) or my saying: { He said, 'Indeed, I am of those who dislike your work' } (2)? For claiming such a thing about the Qur'an, that it is intended by the speaker, is dangerous; rather, it returns to the meaning of His saying: { When you receive it with your tongues and say with your mouths that of which you have no knowledge, and you think it is insignificant, while it is, in the sight of Allah, عظیم } (3) and that it is a statement in the Book of Allah based on opinion" (4).

Chapter Five
The Intention of the Legislator in Establishing
the Sharia for Obligations According to Its Implications
and in the Inclusion of the Obligor Under Its Rulings
It contains an introduction and three sections:

Section One: ... The Intention of Obligation According to the Sharia.
Section Two: ... The Intention of the Legislator in Including the Obligor Under the Rulings of the Sharia.
__________
(1) Surah al-Kahf, 104.
(2) Surah al-Shu'ara, 168.
(3) Surah al-Nur, 15.
(4) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat. 3/248. This means that whoever finds the pun in the Holy Qur'an, as in the two verses above, from where can he claim that it is intended by Allah, Exalted is He, in them? Such a claim is deemed blameworthy as it is based on doubt or conjecture, not on knowledge; that is, certainty. It is akin to slander.
