... Under the following of desires (hawa) fall many positions, fatwas, or actions for which their proponents invoke the attainment of benefits and the prevention of harms, under the title of the objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia), and the identification of benefits and harms based on desires, or the advantages or disadvantages that may befall a person. For this reason, it becomes permissible to commit prohibitions or neglect obligations, under the pretext of preserving a position, job, or wealth, or seeking knowledge, and they refer to the sacrifices, hardships, or harm they may face as harms. Although this way of thinking has no basis in religion, as it renders what the legislator has commanded as harmful and what He has prohibited as beneficial. The falsehood is magnified when the proponents of such claims cling to al-Shatibi and his methodology, as he criticized this approach and referred to these considerations as desires, and he cited in the context of discussing the hardship of opposing desires the saying of Allah, Exalted is He: { Have you seen the one who has taken as his god his own desire, and Allah has led him astray despite his knowledge? } (1) and His saying: { They follow not except assumption and what their souls desire. } (2), and His saying: { Is one who is upon clear evidence from his Lord like one to whom his evil deed has been made attractive, and they follow their desires? } (3). He then said: "Just as hardship can be worldly, it can also be otherworldly. For if actions lead to neglecting an obligation or committing a prohibition, it is considered a greater hardship in terms of the Sharia than the worldly hardship that does not compromise religion. The consideration of religion takes precedence over the consideration of the self and others in the view of the Sharia." (4)
The recognized hardships or those intended to be alleviated:
__________
(1) Surah Al-Jathiya, 23.
(2) Surah An-Najm, 23.
(3) Surah Muhammad, 14.
(4) Al-Shatibi, Al-Muwafaqat, 2/104.
