... The difference in hardships among people makes the allowances vary according to what they can bear, as the allowance is justified by the hardship that is burdensome or unusual: the ruling revolves around the reason for it, whether it exists or not. He says: "The prohibition is for a reason that is rational in meaning and intended by the legislator (1). If this is the case, then the prohibition is contingent upon the existence of the reason. When what the Messenger - (peace and blessings be upon him) - justified is present, the prohibition is directed and applicable; and if it is not present (2), then the prohibition is absent, as people in this regard are of two types" (3). He then mentioned two categories of people: one category experiences work that causes them additional hardship beyond what is usual, affecting them or others, and these are the majority of those obligated. He said regarding them: "Such individuals should not engage in actions that involve this, but rather they should take allowances" (4). He indicated that the allowance should be according to what is legislated, saying: "They take allowances according to what has been legislated for allowances if it is something that cannot be abandoned, or they abandon it if it is something that can be left, which is the implication of the justification" (5).
... The second category consists of ascetics, pious worshippers, or Sufis, or the people of states, as he refers to them in various places in his book. These individuals can endure what others cannot because their love for Allah has led them to renounce their desires, benefits, and pleasures, even if they are permissible. Thus, they are able to fill their time with more religious duties. These individuals are not required to take allowances because the justification is absent in their case (6).
... There is another category of people that al-Shatibi mentions in other parts of his book, which are the people of desires in contrast to the people of states. These individuals may find that abandoning the disliked (makruh) and performing the recommended (mandub) could lead them to a more severe disliked action or to a forbidden (haram) act, or result in abandoning a greater recommended act or an obligation. In this case, it is preferable for them to abandon the recommended act or to perform the disliked act.
__________
(1) This refers to the removal of hardship or distress or compulsion.
(2) That is, the reason.
(3) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/105.
(4) The same source.
(5) The same source.
(6) The same source, 2/93 - 94 - 95.
