One of its conditions is that the ruling regarding it being burdensome or outside the norm must be based on the Sharia, and it may be said that this relates to the two previous conditions. However, it differs from them in that the hardship may undermine a fundamental principle, and yet there is no concession (1), such as the hardships of jihad. He says: "The fact that it is difficult for some people or in some situations does not remove it from being intended for Him" (2), meaning for Allah, Exalted is He. He says: "The hardship may reach in customary actions to what is thought to be unusual, but in reality, it is customary, and its hardship in such a case is what is customary, as the hardship in a single action has two extremes and a mean, an upper extreme... and a lower extreme... and the mean is what is predominant and most common" (3). Accordingly, hardship may increase, leading one to believe it has become unusual, while for those familiar with the flow of customs, meaning what has been established by the Sharia in obligations, it remains in the middle. It has been understood from the objectives of the legislator in obligations that hardships occur for the servants as a test and trial. If that is the case, then to judge whether the hardship is customary or not must be based on the Sharia; otherwise, the test and trial would be invalidated. He said: "The incidental difficulties that befall the servants are a test and trial for the faith of the believers and the hesitation of the uncertain until it becomes clear who has believed in his Lord with certainty from those who are in doubt. If all obligations were to be invalidated by every hardship that arose, then the fundamental principles would be invalidated as previously mentioned, and nothing would be distinguished from that, nor would the pure be distinguished from the impure" (4).
__________
(1) This is because the degree of hardship considered in Sharia varies according to the actions, and this will become clear shortly when discussing the moderation of the Sharia.
(2) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 1/227.
(3) The same source, 2/106.
(4) The same source, 1/228.
