This further clarifies what was mentioned above, which is that the hardship that is considered outside the norm in one action may not be regarded as such in another action, even if it is heavier or more severe. Thus, moderation varies according to the different actions. He says: "The fatigue and hardship in customary actions differ according to those actions... but every action in itself has a customary hardship that is comparable to the hardship of similar ordinary actions" (1). He states: "The hardship in a single action has two extremes and a mean" (2). His phrase "in a single action" indicates this meaning, and thus the customary hardship and the non-customary hardship are recognized by the Sharia, and in each action individually. The Sharia may consider the hardship to be non-customary in one action, while it is lighter for the obligated person than what it considers customary in another action. He says: "Much of what appears at first glance as hardships that are outside the norm may not be so for one who is knowledgeable about the flow of customs, and if it does not fall outside the norm, there would be no intention by the legislator to alleviate it like other customary hardships" (3). He said: "When Allah, Exalted is He, said: { march forth, light and heavy } (4), then said: { if you do not march forth, He will punish you with a painful punishment } (5), this is a point of severity because it implies that there is no concession at all for staying behind, except that it is, according to the evidence on alleviating hardship, applicable to the utmost burden in customary actions such that marching forth is feasible and one can proceed" (6). This means that although the hardship here is heavy, the Sharia considers it customary in such an action, and it does not fall under the principle of obligation that is unbearable or what a person cannot perform. He said: "The essence of hardship is constriction, so whatever is among the customary hardships in actions similar to it is not considered hardship either linguistically or in the Sharia, especially since this type of hardship is established for a legal wisdom, which is purification and testing" (7).
__________
(1) The same source, 2/105.
(2) The same source, 2/106.
(3) The same location.
(4) Surah At-Tawbah, 41.
(5) Surah At-Tawbah, 39.
(6) Al-Shatibi, Al-Muwafaqat, 2/106 - 107.
(7) The same source, 2/107.
