He says: "Indeed, Allah has made following desires opposed to the truth and has made it its counterpart... He has confined the matter to two things: revelation, which is the Sharia, and desire; there is no third option. If that is the case, then they are opposites, and when the truth is determined in revelation, it is directed against desire... All of this is clear in that the intent of the Legislator is to move away from following desires and to enter into servitude to the Lord" (1).
... By making revelation and desire counterparts, he negates the existence of a ruling of reason, and what is imagined to be a ruling of reason in opposition to the ruling of the Sharia is merely desire. Accordingly, what is said to be wisdom or public interest (maslaha) according to rational people and wise individuals, if it is not established by revelation, is desire. Based on this, he established principles and said: "If this is established, it follows that principles arise from it, including that any action in which desire is followed absolutely, without regard to command or prohibition or choice, is absolutely invalid, because an action must have a bearer that compels it and a motivator that calls to it. If there is no entrance for the Legislator in that, then it is only the result of desire and lust, and whatever is thus is absolutely invalid because it contradicts the truth absolutely" (2). Among these principles is: "Following desire is a path to what is blameworthy, even if it comes within the praiseworthy" (3), because if it becomes clear that it is opposed by its very nature to the nature of the Sharia, then wherever it competes with its requirements in action, it is to be feared... For it is a cause of neglecting commands and committing prohibitions" (4).
__________
(1) The same source, 2/115.
(2) The same source, 2/118.
(3) Even if it comes within the praiseworthy, meaning that the goal is legitimate or the intention is sound, such as one who intends to grow the wealth of an orphan by lending it with interest, or one who issues a fatwa permitting interest under the pretext of public interest. Or one who issues a fatwa and participates in ruling by other than what Allah has revealed, claiming to serve the interests of Muslims, and in all of this there is neglect of commands and committing prohibitions, as Allah says: { And prohibited is interest } Al-Baqarah, 275 and His saying: { And whoever does not judge by what Allah has revealed - then it is those who are the wrongdoers } Al-Ma'idah, 45, and others.
(4) Al-Shatibi, Al-Muwafaqat 2/119.
