And if Allah had willed, He could have imposed it while disregarding the interests, or He could have imposed it while stripping away the innate motivations, but He has made it easier for His servants by making it a means to what He desires of cultivating this world for the Hereafter and has made the acquisition of these interests permissible, not prohibited, but according to legal regulations that are more beneficial and more enduring than what the servant considers to be beneficial { and Allah knows, while you do not know } (1). And if He had willed, He could have prevented us from seeking the interests of the Hereafter, for He is the Owner and has the ultimate argument, but He has encouraged us to fulfill the obligatory rights owed to Him by promising us a share of it and has hastened for us many shares that we enjoy along the way of what we have been commanded to do (2).
... So did al-Shatibi affirm the idea of reasoning by bringing about benefits and repelling harms, or did he diminish it?! This depends on the meaning of benefit and the meaning of harm, that is, on the concept of each. It is clear that he has refuted it if it is understood in the sense recognized by the jurists before him, or in the common sense today.
The objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia) are of two types: primary and secondary:
... It follows that the Sharia takes into account the interests of the servants and their purposes and characteristics, but this consideration does not mean following them in legislation; rather, it means following the legal rulings because the interests are achieved through them. The preservation of religion, life, wealth, and other objectives of the Sharia are also interests and objectives for the servants.
The interests of the servants and their benefits are variable and changeable, while the rulings of the Sharia are fixed. Therefore, al-Shatibi refutes al-Razi's statement that the original ruling regarding benefits is permission and regarding harms is prohibition. He also says, "How many a person of desires wishes that a certain permissible thing were prohibited, to the extent that if he were entrusted with legislation, he would prohibit it" (3), and he says, "Even if it were assumed that it were made permissible for him, he would make it obligatory, and then the matter regarding that very permissible thing might turn around, so he may love what he hated today and vice versa, thus a ruling cannot be established in absolute terms" (4).
__________
(1) Surah Al-Baqarah, 216.
(2) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat. 2/122.
(3) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/116.
(4) The same source.
