As for his statement that there is no benefit for the obligated person (mukallaf) in the necessities, while he affirms in many places that all obligations of the Sharia return to the individual with immediate or delayed benefits, for example, he says: "The necessities are of two types: one is that which has an immediate benefit for the obligated person aimed at enabling the individual to fulfill the interests of himself and his dependents in terms of sustenance, housing, clothing, and other transactions such as sales, rentals, marriages, and other means of earning that sustain human structures. The second is that which does not have an immediate intended benefit, such as the obligatory acts of worship, both physical and financial, like purification, prayer, fasting, almsgiving, pilgrimage, and similar acts, or from the obligations of communal responsibility, such as public offices like caliphate, ministry, representation, judiciary, prayers, jihad, education, and other matters that have been legislated generally for public interests" (1). His statement that "there is no benefit for the obligated person in these matters" is from the perspective that they are commands and prohibitions that must be adhered to based on the principle of compliance, regardless of the outcomes they lead to. Yes, they do lead to the benefit of the servant. However, in terms of being necessities, meaning established interests in the Sharia, they must be adhered to because they are legitimate, not because they lead to benefits, as benefits are not fixed, and the servant's view of his benefits is fluctuating, while these necessities are fixed. He says: "We only say that there is no benefit for the servant in them as necessities because they fulfill absolute general interests that are not limited to one state or form, nor to one time over another" (2). He also says: "This is evidenced by the fact that if the servant were to choose contrary to these matters (3), he would be restricted and prevented from his choice. Hence, he becomes devoid of benefit and is ruled upon in himself. If he were to have a benefit in them, it would be from another perspective that is subordinate to this original objective" (4).
__________
(1) The same source, 2/123.
(2) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/120.
(3) These matters are the preservation of religion, life, intellect, lineage, and wealth.
(4) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/121.
