... And if it is the nature of man to seek his interests, then among these interests are those that are lawful, meaning those that are subordinate objectives, and others that are not. The obligated person (mukallaf) may take a lawful or unlawful path to achieve his objective. Likewise, the mukallaf may act with the intention of seeking his interests, or he may do so with the intention of compliance, or with both intentions together.

All these cases will be discussed in detail - if Allah wills - in the next chapter, the chapter on the objectives of the mukallaf.

The third section
Between the Sharia and its objectives
Or between worship and following meanings

The subject of this section:
It has been clarified in the first type of the objectives of the legislator that the Sharia was established to preserve the interests of the servants. The rulings of the Sharia have goals that result from adhering to its rulings, and the legislator intended them by enacting the rulings. It has also been clarified in the fourth type that one of the objectives of the legislator is adherence to the commands and prohibitions.

Between these two types, questions arise. If the rulings were enacted for the interests of the servants, are the rulings a means to those interests, so can the rulings be changed to preserve their goals? And if certain goals for the rulings have been established that the legislator intended, is the mukallaf obligated to the goals, that is, to the effects of the rulings, just as he is obligated to the rulings? And is it valid for the mukallaf to intend goals other than those intended by the legislator?

And if the intention of the legislator is compliance and worship, is it valid for the mukallaf to comply without regard to the intended goals of the legislator? And is everything that results from the rulings or arises from them considered interests or objectives of the legislator? How can one distinguish what is intended by Him - Exalted is He - from what is not? And do interests and harms change with the change of customs according to the change of times and places? And does this have an effect on the rulings?

For such questions and similar ones, this section was created, and the answers will come within it - if Allah wills - according to the methodology of al-Shatibi.
The universality of the Sharia and its stability:
... Al-Shatibi emphasizes within the objective of worship and compliance the universality and stability of the Sharia. It is general for all obligated persons, and no mukallaf is exempt from it at all, and it is general for all actions; there is no action except that you find the Sharia governing it. No mukallaf is exempt from a general ruling in any action except by a specific legal text that does not extend its ruling to the mukallaf, and this does not undermine the principle, which is the universality of the Sharia.
