Among his most important students are three prominent figures: Abu Yahya Muhammad ibn Asim, his brother Abu Bakr the judge, and Abu Abdullah Muhammad al-Bayani. The aforementioned brothers come from a well-known scholarly family in Granada. Abu Yahya was a scholar, an eloquent speaker, a literary writer, and the inheritor of his teacher al-Shatibi's position. He was also a hero of jihad and was martyred in the noble battlefields in the year 813 AH.
Judge Abu Bakr was a jurist (faqih), a scholar of legal theory (usuli), and a hadith narrator (muhaddith) to whom people turned for fatwas. Among his writings is the "Tuhfat al-Hukam," which has received attention in terms of explanation, commentary, and study. He also composed verses on the principles of jurisprudence, grammar, inheritance, and recitations. He summarized his teacher al-Shatibi's book "al-Muwafaqat" and named his summary "Nail al-Muna in Summarizing al-Muwafaqat" (1). He passed away in the year 829 AH (2).
Another of his students was Abu Ja'far Ahmad al-Qassar, the Andalusian from Granada. Al-Shatibi would review some issues with this student while composing his book "al-Muwafaqat," discussing them with him and then recording them (3).
Among his students was also Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Abdul Wahid al-Majari, who passed away in the year 862 AH, the author of the program. He mentioned in his program that al-Shatibi was one of his teachers, stating: "I recited the Alfiyyah of Ibn Malik from memory to him, and he narrated it to me from his teacher, the eminent scholar Abu Abdullah al-Biri." He noted that he learned from him the book of Sibawayh, the summary of Ibn al-Hajib, and the Muwatta of Imam Malik, along with the chains of narration to their authors (4), and he heard some of the "al-Muwafaqat" from him (5).
His scholarly status:
__________
(1) Muhammad Abu al-Ajfan, in his verification of the book "al-Irfadat wa al-Inshadat" by al-Shatibi, p. 26.
(2) See: Hamadi al-Abidi, "al-Shatibi and the Objectives of the Sharia," p. 108, referring to: "Nafh al-Tayyib" by al-Maqri, 5/21.
(3) Muhammad Abu al-Ajfan, in his verification of "al-Irfadat wa al-Inshadat" by al-Shatibi, p. 26.
(4) See: al-Majari, "Program of al-Majari," pp. 116 - 122.
(5) The same source.
