... Accordingly, the interests (masalih) and harms (mafasid) according to the methodology of al-Shatibi are fixed and do not change, and they are what the legislator has established as reasons for the Sharia. The concept of interests and harms is not the same as benefits and detriments, as the latter are relative and not fixed. The rulings are not justified by them. He says: "Generally, benefits and detriments are relative and not real, and the meaning of being relative is that they are benefits or detriments in one situation but not in another, and in relation to one person but not another, or at one time but not at another" (1).
... He also says: "It is not correct to continue to assert that the original principle regarding benefits is permission and regarding detriments is prohibition, as stated by al-Fakhr al-Razi, for there is hardly any real benefit or real harm (2), rather, they are mostly relative, and if the interests and harms are related to the address of the legislator, and we know from His address that it is directed according to circumstances, individuals, and times, so that a specific benefit is permitted at one time or situation or for one person, and not permitted if it is otherwise, then how can one justify the statement that the original principle regarding benefits is permission and regarding detriments is prohibition" (3).
... The meaning of his statement that the Sharia is directed according to circumstances, individuals, and times is that the rulings of the Sharia, in general and in totality, encompass all actions for all accountable individuals at all times. For example, the Sharia has clarified the rulings regarding carrion, blood, and pork in ordinary circumstances, and it has also clarified them in cases of necessity. It has clarified, for instance, the ruling of jihad for the accountable individuals in times of ability, and it has also clarified it in times of inability, illness, or disability.
The customary practice (urf) and its consideration according to al-Shatibi:
__________
(1) The same source, 1/26.
(2) That is, what may be a benefit for one person may be a detriment for him in a different situation or at another time or for another person. This is unlike the interest that is established by the Sharia, which is real, thus being an interest for every person in every situation and at every time. Therefore, it is not correct to replace the term real benefit or real harm with mere benefit or mere harm.
(3) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 1/27.
