... Custom ('urf) is not a source or a basis for legislation, but rather the Sharia (Islamic law) governs customs. Since the Sharia is general and comprehensive, it has assigned a ruling to every action. Certain actions may emerge from among the permissible actions that people become accustomed to, or actions that people abandon, or actions that are specific to certain occasions or times. Thus, abandoning a customary action, performing an abandoned action, or engaging in actions specific to certain occasions may become noticeable and call for interpretations. Alternatively, this action may become a term or a euphemism for a specific meaning or intention.
... An example of this is the complete white dress or the complete black dress for women; the former has become, in current custom, indicative of weddings, while the latter indicates mourning. There are also certain garments that have become, in general or specific custom, indicative of the profession of the wearer.
Another example is certain styles of clothing, head coverings, or shoes, which are originally permissible for both men and women. However, in custom, certain styles have become specific to men and others to women. Thus, in people's understanding, women wearing what is specific to men is seen as imitating them or as a lack of modesty and religion. Similarly, men wearing what is specific to women is viewed as imitating them and as a lack of modesty and religion.
Another example is that the 'awra (private parts) of a man is what is between the navel and the knee, and the original ruling is that revealing or covering anything other than that is permissible. If people become accustomed to covering more than the 'awra, then a man going out in public while covering only what is 'awra would be contrary to custom and indicative of a lack of modesty or a deficiency in manliness or something else.
Similarly, it is permissible for a man to uncover his head as well as to cover it, and some people may develop a custom regarding this.
__________
(1) 'urf: Custom or tradition in Islamic jurisprudence.
(2) 'awra: The parts of the body that must be covered in Islamic law.
(3) Manliness: A term referring to qualities traditionally associated with men, such as honor and dignity.
