He said: "The criterion is that if turning to the effect (muscab) strengthens the cause and completes it, and encourages one to strive to fulfill it, then it brings about benefit (maslaha). But if it tends to undermine the cause by nullifying it, weakening it, or being negligent towards it, then it brings about harm (mafsada)" (1).
He concluded that: "The one who refrains from focusing on the effects is of a higher rank and has a purer deed if he is engaged in acts of worship, and he receives greater reward in customary matters" (2).
Based on the fact that benefits and harms do not exist in isolation, the cause leads to its intended effects, accompanied by what is not intended by the Legislator, but rather what is intended to be lifted. He says: "An example of this is the command to enjoin good and forbid evil, for it is legislated because it is a cause for establishing the religion, manifesting the symbols of Islam, and suppressing falsehood in any form. It is not a cause in the legal sense for the destruction of wealth or life, even if it leads to that along the way... The establishment of punishments and retribution is legislated for the benefit of deterring corruption, even if it leads to the destruction of lives and the spilling of blood, which in itself is a harm... As for the prohibited causes, such as invalid marriages, they are forbidden even if they lead to the attachment of offspring and the establishment of inheritance and other rulings, which are benefits" (3).
Then he said: "There is no legislated cause except that it contains a benefit for which it was legislated. If you see it leading to a harm, know that it does not arise from the legislated cause. Likewise, there is no prohibited cause except that it contains a harm for which it was prohibited. If you see it leading to a benefit in appearance, know that it does not arise from the prohibited cause, but rather each of them produces what it was established for in the Sharia" (4).
__________
(1) The same source, 1/166.
(2) The same source, 1/159.
(3) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 1/167.
(4) The same source, p. 168.
