... If it is established that the rulings have their intended purposes as intended by the Legislator, which are the interests (masalih) or the causes (illal), then there are some rulings for which no cause can be found that is suitable for extending the ruling by analogy, even if a cause is known that is characterized by a generality that does not allow for analogy to be applied. This is similar to the reasoning for acts of worship, which is based on devotion and compliance. Therefore, there are some rulings for which one should not seek a cause, and there are rulings for which one must provide a rationale or follow the meanings in order to ascertain their causes.
The meaning of following the meanings:
... The causes or interests are not considered valid unless they are definitively established through induction. The method of induction is to examine the rulings and derive the meanings and judgments that result from them. What the mind typically considers when reflecting is the rational meanings or appropriate descriptions; however, the existence of a specific meaning in a few texts is not sufficient for it to be considered valid. There must be a large number of rulings that contain that meaning for it to be valid, which resembles the concept of moral transmission (tawatur al-ma'nawi) in the terminology of hadith science. Thus, imagining a valid meaning in a few rulings is not enough for it to be considered, and it must be established in numerous rulings that exceed enumeration. This establishment or search for meaning or its pursuit in the rulings is what is meant by following the meanings. Al-Shatibi did not intend by following the meanings to apply a meaning merely due to the existence of an imagined or presumed connection between it and the ruling.
... Following the meanings is not limited to appropriate descriptions or those that the mind perceives the wisdom in. Any meaning that is established through induction is definitively considered valid in Sharia merely due to the existence of a causal relationship between it and the rulings that were induced. However, most of what the Legislator has used to justify the rulings is the appropriate, which, when presented to the minds, is readily accepted. Therefore, the key in following the meanings is to consider the rulings first, and then examine their causes or meanings, regardless of whether they are appropriate or not. In reality, most of the justifications in Sharia have come with appropriate descriptions or rational meanings. Al-Shatibi says: "When transmission and reason support the legal issues, it is on the condition that transmission precedes and is followed by reason, so reason does not roam in the field of reflection except to the extent that transmission allows it" (1). He also said: "The Legislator has elaborated on the causes and rulings in legislating the chapter on customs... Most of what he justified in it was the appropriate, which, when presented to the minds, was readily accepted" (2).
In contrast to following the meanings is devotion (ta'abud), which means not seeking any meaning or intended interest behind the ruling—any cause—other than the interest of obedience and compliance.
Acts of worship are not justified:
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat. 1/53.
(2) The same source, 2/213.
