... These acts of worship and customary practices, although it is not correct to pay attention to their meanings in the sense that analogy (qiyas) cannot be applied to them or based on them, they do have a comprehensible meaning, even if it is not one that is suitable for analogy. This is in addition to the general meaning, which is worship. He says: "If it is said, is there a reason for these acts of worship (ta'abudat)(1) that can be understood as the specific intent of the legislator or not? The answer is that, as for acts of worship, their required action is mere submission without addition or reduction. Therefore, when Aisha (may Allah be pleased with her) was asked about the obligation of a menstruating woman to make up fasting but not prayer, she said to the questioner: 'Are you a Haruriyya!' in denial of her asking about such a thing, as the act of worship was not established to understand its specific reason. Then she said: 'We were commanded to make up fasting and we were not commanded to make up prayer'(2). This supports the idea of worship over reasoning based on hardship, and the saying of Ibn al-Musayyib regarding the legislator's equal treatment of the fingers: 'It is the Sunnah, my nephew'(3), which indicates that there is no reason. As for customary practices and some acts of worship, they also have a comprehensible meaning, which is the regulation of the means of public interest (maslaha)... Thus, the legislator has set specific limits that should not be exceeded, such as eighty lashes for slander, one hundred lashes and exile for fornication without marriage, and the cutting of the hand at the wrist, and in the specified amounts"(4).
It is necessary to consider worship in customary practices:
__________
(1) That is, acts of worship, and customary practices that are exempted from the principle of paying attention to meaning.
(2) Narrated by Muslim in the chapter on the obligation of making up fasting for the menstruating woman but not prayer (506), (508), and by al-Tirmidhi (120) who said: it is good and authentic. And by al-Nasa'i (379) and Ahmad (22908).
(3) Al-Muwatta, chapter on what has been narrated regarding the blood money for fingers (1355).
(4) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/213.
