... This does not mean - in any way - that the recognized meanings in the rulings of customary practices, that is, those established through induction, or in other words: the public interests (masalih), can lead to the annulment of rulings based on them. This is due to the necessity of applying both the general principles and the specific cases together, as these rulings are the ones that the Legislator has made a pathway to the public interests, and thus they cannot be annulled on the pretext that the intent or meaning has been understood, and therefore the rulings can be changed while preserving the objectives (maqasid) and meanings. This is because devotion (ta'abud) exists in all rulings, whether they are related to acts of worship (ibadat) or customary practices (adat). He says: "Everything in which the consideration of devotion is established, there is no branching from it, and everything in which the consideration of meanings is established, devotion must also be considered in it" (1). He presents many proofs for this matter, including that understanding a purpose or interest of the ruling does not mean understanding all the intended interests behind it, and that the optimal way to achieve the intended goal is the legislated way, as well as the purpose of compliance and others. Based on this, he concludes: "Every legal ruling is not devoid of the right of Allah, Exalted is He, which is the aspect of devotion" (2). This will be discussed in greater detail in the next chapter, the chapter on the objectives of the accountable person.

Chapter Six
Objectives of the Accountable Person

... It contains an introduction and three sections:

Section One: Objectives and Intentions.
Section Two: Actions of the Accountable Person and Their Objectives.
Section Three: Legal Stratagems.

Chapter Six
Objectives of the Accountable Person

Introduction:
Al-Shatibi said: "The objectives that are considered are of two types: one that pertains to the intent of the Legislator and the other that pertains to the intent of the accountable person" (3). The first type of objectives, which pertains to the intent of the Legislator, has been clarified in the previous sections. The second type, which is the objectives of the accountable person, will be clarified - if Allah wills - in this chapter.
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/214.
(2) The same source, 2/221.
(3) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/1.
