He said: "Al-Baydawi defined it as, in Sharia, the intention directed towards an action seeking the Face of Allah, Exalted is He, and in compliance with His command. Linguistically, it is the movement of the heart towards what it sees as aligned with a purpose of bringing benefit or averting harm, whether in the present or in the future" (1).
And al-Suyuti said: "Its place is the heart in every instance because its reality is intention in general, and it is said: the intention concurrent with the action, which is a description of the action of the heart. Al-Baydawi said: Intention is the movement of the heart towards what it sees as bringing benefit or averting harm, whether in the present or in the future. And the Sharia specified it as the intention directed towards an action seeking the pleasure of Allah, Exalted is He, and in compliance with His command" (2).
Ibn Rajab al-Hanbali said: "Know that intention in the language is a type of purpose and will, even though a distinction has been made between these terms" (3). He then mentioned what implies a rejection of this distinction, as will become clear. It is evident from the previous texts of the scholars regarding intention and purpose that they are interchangeable in meaning in the language, considering that the term purpose is broader than the term intention, which is indicated by al-Suyuti's statement: "Its reality is intention in general," and Ibn Rajab's statement: "Intention in the language is a type of purpose and will."
__________
(1) The same source.
(2) Al-Suyuti, Jalal al-Din Abdul Rahman ibn Abi Bakr, who died in 911 AH, Al-Ashbah wa al-Nazair fi Qawa'id wa Furu' Fiqh al-Shafi'i, p. 76, 2nd ed., 1414 AH - 1993 CE, edited and commented by Dr. Muhammad al-Mu'tasim Billah al-Baghdadi, Dar al-Kitab al-Arabi - Beirut.
(3) Ibn Rajab al-Hanbali, Jam' al-Ulum wa al-Hikam fi Sharh Khamsin Hadithan min Jawami' al-Kalim, p. 16, edited by Fuad ibn Ali Hafiz, 2nd ed., 1421 AH - 2000 CE, Al-Rayan Foundation Beirut.
