Al-Suyuti said similarly: "The purpose for which the intention (niyyah) was legislated is primarily to distinguish acts of worship from customary practices and to differentiate the ranks of acts of worship from one another... Abstaining from things that break the fast may be for health reasons or treatment, or due to a lack of need for it... Giving money to others may be a gift or a connection for a worldly purpose, or it may be an act of devotion such as zakat, charity, or expiation... Each of ablution (wudu), full-body washing (ghusl), prayer (salah), and fasting (sawm) may be obligatory (fard), a vow (nadr), or supererogatory (nafl), and dry ablution (tayammum) may be for ritual impurity or major impurity, while its form is the same."(1)
Ibn Najim al-Hanafi said: "They said: The objective in it is to distinguish between acts of worship and customary practices, and to distinguish some acts of worship from others"(2).
Sincerity and Associating Partners in Objectives:
Al-Ghazali said: "Know that everything can be imagined to be mixed with something else, and when it is purified from its mixture and freed from it, it is called pure, and the action that is purified and sincere is called sincerity (ikhlas)."(3) He also said: "So, whenever the motive is singular in its intention, the action that results from it is called sincerity in relation to the intended purpose. Whoever gives charity with the sole intention of showing off is sincere, and whoever's intention is solely to draw closer to Allah Exalted is He is sincere. However, it is customary to reserve the name of sincerity for the intention of drawing closer to Allah Exalted is He, free from all impurities."(4)
As for associating partners (tashrik), it is the opposite of sincerity (ikhlas). Al-Ghazali said: "Sincerity is opposed by associating partners, so whoever is not sincere is a polytheist. However, polytheism has degrees; sincerity in monotheism is opposed by associating partners in divinity"(5). He also said: "Sincerity and its opposite both enter the heart; their place is the heart, and this occurs in intentions and purposes"(6).
__________
(1) Al-Suyuti, Al-Ashbah wa al-Nazair, pp. 46 - 47.
(2) Ibn Nujaym al-Hanafi, Al-Ashbah wa al-Nazair, p. 24.
(3) Al-Ghazali, Ihya Ulum al-Din. 4/379.
(4) Al-Ghazali, Ihya Ulum al-Din. 4/379.
(5) The same place.
(6) The same place.
