There has not been sufficient attention given to the book or its content that matches some of the praise and commendation it has received since the time of al-Shatibi until now. As for the time of al-Shatibi and his students, the main point is that some of his students heard parts of it from him or in his presence. One of his students, namely the judge Abu Bakr ibn Asim, summarized the book and named his summary: "Nail al-Muna in the Summary of the Muwafaqat" (1). His brother Abu Yahya ibn Asim composed it in six thousand verses and named his composition: "Nail al-Muna from the Muwafaqat" (2). As for the summary, I have not found any mention of its existence today. As for the composition, there exists a manuscript of it in the Escorial Monastery under number 1164. He began his composition with the following lines (the rajas):

Praise be to Allah, who by His grace ... has spread in the prescribed matters the secret of His wisdom
And has prepared minds for guidance ... in accordance with the address and the obligations

Then he said:

Knowledge is the most worthy of what time requires ... and its books are the trusted companion
And the source that is sweet and abundant ... and among the most important of them is the Muwafaqat
By our master, the distinguished scholar ... that is Abu Ishaq, the son of al-Shatibi
For it is a book of good objectives ... beyond which there is no goal for the seeker
And he had named it with the title ... and chose, from a vision, that second name
And I have heard some of it from him ... and from him in my visits to him
But my disagreement with it was ... only a small amount that is not sufficient

Until he said:

And making for it among the attributes ... (Nail al-Muna from the Muwafaqat)
Its count does not exceed in writing ... six thousand of the composed
And here I am with what I intended to bring ... presenting the ruling of the preliminaries

__________

(1) See: Hamadi al-Abidi, al-Shatibi and the Objectives of the Sharia, p. 108.
(2) See: the same source, and see: Muhammad Abu al-Ajfan, in his edition of the Tafsir and Insha'adat of al-Shatibi, pp. 31, 32.
