And the sharing in the objectives (maqasid) is the sharing between the intention of complying with the command of the Legislator or drawing closer to Him and the intention of fulfilling one's own desires. Among the desires of the self, some are for show (riya) and some are not for show; show is when one acts to be seen by people, such as someone who acts to be seen by the prince or others to gain esteem in their eyes because these people can see. As for one who acts with the intention of profit or gain or enjoying good things, this is an intention for the desires of the self and not show. Al-Qarafi said: "To perform the commanded action and draw closer to Allah, Exalted is He, with the intention of seeking His face and for people to esteem him or for him to be esteemed in their hearts, so that their benefit reaches him or harm is repelled from him, this is the basis of one category of show, and the other category is to perform an action without intending the face of Allah at all, but only for people. This category is called: show of sincerity, while the first is the show of polytheism, because this does not involve sharing but is purely for creation, and the first is for creation and for Allah, Exalted is He"(1). He also said: "As for absolute sharing, like one who strives to attain the obedience of Allah through jihad and to obtain wealth from the spoils, this does not harm him, nor is it prohibited by consensus, because Allah, Exalted is He, has made this for him in this act of worship. He distinguishes between striving to have people say that he is brave or for the imam to esteem him so that his gifts from the public treasury increase; this and similar actions are forbidden show, and between striving to obtain captives, horses, and weapons from the enemy's wealth; this does not harm him even though he has shared, and this is not called show because show is to act so that he is seen by others among His creation, and sight is only valid from creation. Therefore, for one who does not see or perceive, it cannot be said that the action is show in relation to him, and the wealth obtained from the spoils and similar matters cannot be said to be seen or perceived, so the term show does not apply to these intentions due to the lack of sight in them"(2).(3)
Based on what has been mentioned, one can detail the ruling on sharing between the intention of compliance and the intention of desire.
__________
(1) Al-Qarafi, Shihab al-Din, al-Furuq: 3/22, difference: 122.
(2) Thus is the text. Perhaps its origin is: to act to be seen by...
(3) Al-Qarafi, Shihab al-Din, al-Furuq: difference 122, 3/22 - 23.
