As for when the intention of self-interest is mixed with the intention of obedience and drawing closer to Allah, this is where the disagreement and elaboration arise. Al-Qarafi - as has been clarified - distinguished between showing off (riya) and other forms of self-interest, deeming the former as forbidden and nullifying to actions. As for al-Ghazali, although he distinguished between them in terms of prohibition and permissibility, he did not differentiate between them regarding their effect on the action that is mixed with intentions. He said: "Enjoyment and pleasure are not sins, but one will be questioned about them, and whoever is held to account will be punished, while one who engages in something permissible in this world will not be punished in the Hereafter, but their enjoyment in the Hereafter will be diminished in proportion to it, and it is a great loss to hasten towards what perishes and lose out on an everlasting increase in enjoyment" (1). He said: "Now we will discuss one who is motivated by the intention of drawing closer to Allah, but this motivation is mixed with another motive, either from showing off or from other forms of self-interest. An example of this is one who fasts to benefit from the health gained through fasting while intending to draw closer to Allah, or one who frees a slave to rid himself of their burden and bad character, or one who performs Hajj to improve their health through the movement of travel, or to escape from harm that may befall them in their homeland" (2). He then said: "These self-interests, if they are the sole motivators, the severity of the matter is clear for their owner, but we are considering the case where the original intention is to draw closer to Allah and these matters are added to it" (3). He said: "The psychological motive may be equal to the religious motive, stronger than it, or weaker" (4).
__________
(1) Al-Ghazali, Ihya Ulum al-Din, 4/371 - 372.
(2) The same source, 4/379.
(3) The same source, 4/380.
(4) The same source.
