Ibn Rajab al-Hanbali said: "Indeed, the entire religion revolves around performing the commanded acts, avoiding the prohibited ones, and refraining from doubtful matters" (1). He then said: "This is accomplished through two matters: the first is that the outward action conforms to the Sunnah, and this is what is encompassed in the hadith of Aisha: 'Whoever introduces something into this matter of ours that is not part of it, it is rejected' " (2). The second is that the inward intention of the action is directed towards the Face of Allah, as indicated in the hadith of Umar: "Actions are judged by intentions." Al-Fudayl said regarding the saying of Allah, { He will test you to see which of you is best in deed } (3): "It means the most sincere and the most correct." He said: "If an action is sincere but not correct, it will not be accepted; and if it is correct but not sincere, it will not be accepted until it is both sincere and correct. The sincere action is that which is for Allah, Exalted is He, and the correct action is that which is in accordance with the Sunnah" (4).

Section Two
The Actions of the Responsible and Their Objectives

The Impact of the Objectives of the Responsible on Actions According to al-Shatibi:
Actions are of two types: lawful actions and unlawful actions, and the focus of this research now is on lawful actions. As for unlawful actions, they will be the subject of the subsequent research.
__________
(1) Ibn Rajab al-Hanbali, Jamia al-Uloom wal-Hikam, p. 20.
(2) Narrated by al-Bukhari in the chapter on reconciliation (2499), and al-Bukhari also narrated in the Book of Knowledge in the chapter on when a worker or ruler makes a mistake contrary to the Messenger without knowledge, his ruling is rejected: "Whoever performs an action that is not in accordance with our command, it is rejected," and Muslim in the chapter on judgments regarding invalid rulings and the rejection of innovations (1718), and Abu Dawood (1406), and Ibn Majah (14). And Ahmad (24840) and (24995), and in some narrations, there is a substitution for it.
(3) Surah Al-Mulk, 2. And Hud, 7.
(4) Ibn Rajab al-Hanbali, Jamia al-Uloom wal-Hikam, p. 20.
