He says: "Regarding the man who prays to Allah and then finds within himself that he loves to be seen and loves to be noticed on the way to the mosque and dislikes to be noticed on the way of others... that is, the devil comes to a person when he is pleased by the sight of people seeing him doing good and says to him: 'You are showing off,' whereas this is merely something that occurs in his heart that he cannot control" (1). Then he brings his arguments for this, and continues to mention the three categories, saying: "The second is what pertains to the individual himself while being heedless of showing off to others. Among its examples is: praying in the mosque for the sake of enjoying the company of neighbors, or praying at night for the sake of monitoring or observing conditions, the second: fasting to save money or to take a break from cooking or to protect oneself from pain or an illness that is anticipated or from a previous bout of indigestion, the third: giving charity for the pleasure of generosity and favoring others... the seventh: performing ablution for the sake of cooling down, the eighth: seclusion (i'tikaf) to escape from paying rent... the eleventh: performing pilgrimage (hajj) on foot to save on transportation costs. This point is also a matter of disagreement if the mentioned intention is subordinate to the intention of worship" (2). Al-Shatibi went on to validate the worship here, although it is preferable to separate the intention of worship from the intention of worldly matters. As for the third category, he states: "The third pertains to showing off... it is the blameworthy showing off in the Sharia, and the worst of it is the actions of the hypocrites who enter Islam outwardly with the intention of securing their blood and wealth" (3).
This is regarding the first category related to acts of worship, as for the second category related to customary practices, he states: "As for the second, which is that the action is a reform of the customary practices among the people, such as marriage, sale, and leasing... this is also a share that has been established by the legislator and taken into account in commands and prohibitions, and this is known from his intention through the laws set for it. If this is understood in general, then seeking it from that angle does not contradict the intention of the legislator, thus it is rightful and valid..." (4).
__________
(1) The same source, 1/150.
(2) The same source, 1/151 - 153.
(3) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/153.
(4) The same location.
