It has been previously clarified that the objectives of the Legislator (maqasid al-sharia) are of two types: original and subsidiary. The original objectives are those for which there is no consideration for the obligated person (mukallaf). They mean performing an action or refraining from it based on a command or prohibition without regard to interests or outcomes, and interests only arise within the framework of obligation. As for the subsidiary objectives, they are legal objectives that take into account the interests of the obligated person, such as ownership and enjoyment, and so forth. These are objectives that the obligated person may intend through their actions, and Allah - Exalted is He - has legislated rulings for their sake. Thus, the rulings are causes for them, and these interests are legal objectives, so it is permissible for the obligated person to intend them through these causes, just as it is permissible for them not to intend them, but rather to intend compliance only through those causes.
According to rational division, the actions of the accountable person (mukallaf) may conform to the command and prohibition, making the form of the action legitimate. However, the intention of the doer behind their action may be lawful or unlawful, meaning it may be in accordance with the law or contrary to it.
Similarly, an action can be contrary to a command or prohibition, so the form of the act may be unlawful, but the intention of the doer may be lawful or unlawful.
These are four categories that al-Shatibi elaborated on. Although there was a previous mention of some of this in the earlier discussion, it was in terms of conformity or non-conformity to the intent of the legislator, and not in terms of opposition to the intent of the legislator.
There is a fifth category that will be referred to after explaining these four categories, which is when the action is legal (shar'i) and the intention is legal (shar'i), but the action was not legislated for this intention, rather for another. Similarly, the benefit or intention in general was not intended by the legislator (shari') with this action, but rather with another. This is like the act of cutting off a hand; it is a legal action, and the intention of deterrence is a legal intention. However, cutting off the hand of an apostate or a fornicator is not legal. This is because cutting off the hand, which is legal, was not established for deterring the apostate or the fornicator, even though deterring them is legal.
