As for the second type, he said: "The second is that the action or abstention is in accordance, but he is aware of the conformity, and yet he intends to oppose it. An example of this is praying for show to gain worldly benefits, or to gain respect among people, or to avert death from himself, and the like. This category is more severe than the previous one, and its essence is that this worker has made the legal subjects that were intended as means for other matters, which the Legislator did not intend them for, thus it includes hypocrisy, ostentation, and tricks against the rulings of Allah, Exalted is He, and all of this is invalid because the intention opposes the intention of the Legislator in essence, so it is not valid at all" (1).
As for the fourth category, which is that the action or abstention is contrary while the intention is in accordance, al-Shatibi elaborates and expands on it. He says: "The fourth category is that the action or abstention is contrary while the intention is in accordance; it is also of two types. One is that it is done with knowledge of the opposition, and the other is that it is done in ignorance of it. If it is done with knowledge of the opposition, this is innovation, such as establishing new acts of worship and additions to what has been legislated. However, it is common that one does not dare to do this except with a type of interpretation, and yet it is condemned as stated in the Qur'an and the Sunnah" (2).
As for if the action is contrary to the command or prohibition while being ignorant of the opposition, but the intention is in accordance with the intention of the Legislator and the worker intends to conform, this is a matter of consideration, ijtihad, and disagreement, and there is no single rule regarding its judgment. Al-Shatibi indicated that it is a thorny issue. This is because it cannot be judged as invalid since the correctness of the intention in the action affects the ruling on it, nor can it be judged as valid since the opposition to the command and prohibition also affects it.
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/236.
(2) The same source.
