The lack of compliance leads to a ruling of invalidity, except that the validity of intention with ignorance of the violation necessitates the correction that ignorance may occur in the Sharia in the same way as forgetfulness or error for which there is no accountability (1). Therefore, some of these actions may be rectified. However, he did not clarify a principle regarding this. He said: "If it is said: His (peace and blessings be upon him) statement: 'Actions are judged by intentions' indicates that these actions, even if they are in violation, may be considered, for the intentions are the souls of actions, thus the action has become a body with a soul in general. If that is the case, it is considered, unlike when the intention is in conflict with the action or when both are in conflict, for then it is a body without a soul, and it does not fulfill the implication of his statement: 'Actions are judged by intentions' due to the lack of intention in the action. It is said that if this is conceded, it is opposed by his (peace and blessings be upon him) statement: 'Every action not in accordance with our command is rejected' (2), and this action is not in accordance with his command (peace and blessings be upon him), thus it is not considered but rather rejected. Also, just as a body without a soul is of no benefit, so too is a soul without a body" (3). Then he said: "Thus, the issue was very problematic" (4).
Thus, should the aspect of the compliant intention be considered to validate the action, or should the aspect of the conflicting action be considered to invalidate the action, or should both aspects be considered? (5).
__________
(1) This is unlike what we mentioned from al-Ghazali in the previous discussion of this chapter.
(2) This was previously cited in relation to the hadith: "Whoever introduces something into this matter of ours that is not part of it, it is rejected."
(3) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/239.
(4) The same location.
(5) We note here that the violation is with ignorance of the violation, meaning with the assumption that it is not a violation.
