It is agreed upon that an error in action, if it is not intended to contravene, or if it is intended to comply with the intention of the Lawgiver, then the accountability in the Hereafter for it is lifted. It is also agreed upon that this accountability is not lifted absolutely, whether in this world or the Hereafter. Al-Shatibi said: "And in the hadith: 'Mistakes, forgetfulness, and what one is compelled to do are lifted from my community' (1), and this is a generally agreed-upon meaning with no opposition, although they differ regarding the lifting of accountability: whether it is specific to the accountability in the Hereafter or not. They also did not disagree that the lifting of accountability in general is not valid" (2)(3).
As for the fifth category, which is that the action is lawful and the intention is lawful, but the action was not legislated for this intention, or was not established in the law as a cause for this effect, it has been clarified within the fourth type of the objectives of the Lawgiver under the title of the legal connection between the cause and the effect. The following is its explanation as mentioned by al-Shatibi in the section on the objectives of the obligated person.
__________
(1) Narrated by Ibn Majah in the chapter on the divorce of the compelled and the forgetful (2033) and (2034) with the wording: "Indeed, Allah has overlooked" instead of "lifted." And (2035) with the wording "placed."
(2) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/241.
(3) Al-Suyuti said: "Know that the legal maxim is: 'Forgetfulness and ignorance absolve one from sin absolutely.' As for the ruling, if they occur in neglecting a commanded act, it does not absolve, rather it must be rectified, and the reward associated with it is not attained due to the lack of compliance, or in performing a prohibited act that is not in the category of damage, then there is nothing in it, or if it involves damage, the liability is not lifted. If it incurs punishment, it is a doubt regarding its abrogation." Al-Ashbah wa al-Nazair, pp. 239 - 240. And see the discussion on the ignorant, the forgetful, and the compelled, pp. 337 - 374 of the same book.
