The second type is that which is within the capacity of the accountable person (mukallaf). They are able to create the cause, condition, or impediment, or they can remove it, thereby causing a change in the legal ruling. Examples of this include: "As for the cause, it is like the marriage being a cause for inheritance between the spouses, the prohibition of marriage relations by marriage (mahram) and the permissibility of enjoyment, and slaughter being a cause for the permissibility of eating, and travel being a cause for the permissibility of shortening prayers and breaking the fast, and killing and wounding being causes for retribution (qisas), and adultery, drinking alcohol, theft, and slander being causes for the imposition of those punishments, and similar matters" (1). Examples of the condition include the marriage being a condition for the occurrence of divorce or for the permissibility of reconciling with a divorced woman after three divorces, and the ability to defend oneself being a condition for stoning the adulterer, and purity being a condition for the validity of prayer, and intention being a condition for acts of worship" (2). Examples of the impediment include "the marriage to a sister being an impediment to marrying another sister, and the marriage to a woman being an impediment to marrying her aunt or maternal aunt, and faith being an impediment to retribution for the disbeliever, and disbelief being an impediment to the acceptance of good deeds" (3).
Thus, in this second type, the accountable person can perform these actions which are causes, conditions, or impediments for others, thereby causing a change in the legal ruling. They may perform these actions with the intention of complying with the command of the legislator in them or achieving their legal objectives, or with the intention of changing the rulings. If it is with the intention of changing the rulings, it is termed legal stratagems (hiyal). Therefore, al-Shatibi frequently mentioned legal stratagems when discussing these three aspects of legal rulings: cause, condition, and impediment (4).
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 1/129.
(2) The same source, 1/130.
(3) The same source, 1/130.
(4) The same source, 1/ Book of Rulings.
