Those who have lost their efforts in this worldly life while thinking that they are doing good - in the best of cases - said: "Leave these people alone, for they are stagnant, they do not evolve, nor do they innovate, and they do not understand reality. Indeed, there are secrets in the Sharia (Islamic law) and priorities and balances in the religion. When confronted with the texts of the Qur'an and the Sunnah, they become confused and evasive, searching and digging, then they cherry-pick and say." Among what they said was: "interests (masalih) and objectives (maqasid), al-Shatibi and the Muwafaqat of al-Shatibi, the Muwafaqat: the masterpiece of al-Shatibi, the Sheikh of the objectives." They cherry-picked and then dared to say: "Those who confront us with the texts are still governed by the complex of the text, and they delude themselves that they are scholars of jurisprudence while others are literalists." What audacity is this! And what kind of jurisprudence is this! And among whom do they rush!
The researcher looked into these statements and opinions. Interests, and the interests that are not specified! No problem, let it be, but what you have brought forth is neither interests nor unspecified interests; it is - in the terminology of usul al-fiqh (principles of jurisprudence) - nullified interests, contradicted by the texts, thus they are, in fact, evils (mafasid).
Objectives, the objectives of the Sharia! Yes, let it be, but what you have brought forth is not the objectives of the Sharia; it is your objectives, or the objectives of those with diseased hearts. Where in the objectives of the Sharia does it state that preserving the religion means freedom of belief and the right to change one's religion? And where in the objectives of the Sharia is the abrogation of the Sharia such that apostasy becomes a human right, and killing an apostate becomes a crime? And is it in the objectives of the Sharia that the text states: { And He has forbidden usury } (1) and the objective is that usury is permissible, with time and place being sufficient for that!
And where in the objectives of the Sharia does preserving wealth mean freedom of ownership, and preserving the intellect mean freedom of opinion? Is this in our religion, we Muslims?
__________
(1) Surah Al-Baqarah, 275.
