The seriousness of al-Shatibi is evident in the two mentioned books through his precision and his clarification of the intended meaning of any term he uses, as well as his thoroughness and elaboration on this meaning. This includes the intended meaning of innovation (bid'a) and his examination of the sects, the meaning of what is permissible (mubah), and his establishment of criteria and boundaries for what is necessary, what is needed, what is commendable, or what is supplementary, along with his extensive explanation of what constitutes a concession (rukhsah) and what does not.
In the book al-I'tisam, he frequently applies the principles he previously established in al-Muwafaqat.
3 - The Book of Majalis. This is a commentary on the book of sales from Sahih al-Bukhari. Al-Tanbukti states that it contains benefits and investigations that only Allah, Exalted is He, knows (1).
4 - Sharh al-Khalasah. This is a book on grammar, in which he explains Ibn Malik's Alfiyyah in four large volumes. Al-Tanbukti said about it: "I do not know of any work that has been composed on it that matches it in research and investigation" (2).
5 - The Title of Agreement in the Science of Derivation. Dr. Hamadi al-Abidi said: "It is a book, as its title indicates, in the science of morphology and the jurisprudence of language, and it is likely similar to the book al-Khasais by Ibn Jinni. He has taken it from his references in his commentary on Ibn Malik's Alfiyyah, and some references mention that this book was lost while the author was still alive" (3).
6 - Usul al-Nahw. Dr. al-Abidi said: "It is a book on the rules of language, including grammar and morphology, which is limited to the essential rules that are indispensable, and he has made it for students of this science. It is said that it was also lost" (4).
7 - Al-Ifadat wa al-Inshadat. This is a book in which the author mentions some news and events that occurred with him or that he is aware of, which may be beneficial to mention. He also mentions some events in which poetry is recited. This book is printed with the investigation of Professor Muhammad Abu al-Ajfan.
__________
(1) Al-Tanbukti, Nail al-Ibtihaj, p. 48.
(2) Same source.
(3) Hamadi al-Abidi, Al-Shatibi and the Objectives of the Sharia, p. 98.
(4) Same reference, p. 99.
