The first: It is that the action is invalid because it contradicts the intention of the legislator, so its effects do not apply, and it is akin to something that is considered non-existent in terms of its effects. The difference between them is that there was no agreement on the return of the gift, or it did not revert to the gathering after separation or to the separation after gathering. He said: "The intention in it has become non-legitimate, so the action in it is contrary to the intention of the legislator, and it is in the ruling of that which has not been acted upon, and it is united with the first category in ruling, so no ruling is established for this action. An example of this is if one spends the nisab before the year is completed on its benefits or gifts it in a gift from which he does not return, or gathers the separated or separates the gathered, all with the intention of evading zakat, but he did not return to what he was before the year." Then he said: "So it was as if it were nonexistent, invalid, and it was included in the first category."
The second: It is that this action with this intention is non-legitimate and involves disobedience, yet its effects are established. Thus, the one who intends to travel for the purpose of breaking the fast and shortening the prayer achieves that, and the marriage of the divorced woman three times with the intention of making her lawful for her ex-husband is valid through her divorce. He said: "And upon this principle, the correctness of what al-Lakhmi says about one who donates part of his wealth to exempt himself from zakat or travels in Ramadan with the intention of breaking the fast or delays a prayer that is due from its preferred time to pray it in travel as two rak'ahs. Or a woman delays a prayer after its time has entered in the hope that she will menstruate so that it is lifted from her. He said: All of this is disliked, and it is not obligatory for one in travel to fast nor to pray four rak'ahs, nor for the menstruating woman to make up her prayer."
__________
(1) The first category is the one mentioned above where the action is considered as if it does not exist.
(2) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 1/195.
(3) The same source.
(4) The same source, 1/196.
