The right of the servant is not an inherent right; rather, it is a right granted to him by Allah - Exalted is He. Likewise, the servant's right contains a right of Allah. Al-Shatibi said: "From here, the scholars say that some obligations are rights of Allah alone, which pertain to worship, and some are rights of the servant. They say regarding the latter that it contains a right of Allah, as in the case of the intentional killer if he is pardoned, he receives one hundred lashes and is imprisoned for a year" (1). He then said: "Thus, every obligation has become a right of Allah; what belongs to Allah is for Him, and what belongs to the servant is ultimately referred to Allah in terms of His right over it and in terms of the servant's right being one of Allah's rights, since it is within Allah's power not to grant the servant any right at all" (2).
Based on this, the servant's right is not absolute, as every obligation contains a right of Allah. The rights of Allah are of two types. The first: what is a right of Allah alone and cannot be waived, such as acts of worship. The second: the rights of others, where the servant cannot waive the right of another, but that other person has the ability to waive their right, unlike the acts of worship from the first category, which cannot be waived. The rights of others include sales, exchanges, and expenditures, so the servant must fulfill the right owed to the one it belongs to. If that latter waives their right, that is their choice.
The right of others upon the servant is from the rights of other servants, thus it is not absolute, and it contains a right of Allah. If the other person waives their right, it is waived, and the right of Allah remains, as in the case of the intentional killer if he is pardoned, he receives one hundred lashes and is imprisoned for a year, and in the case of the killer by treachery, there is no pardon for him, and in the penalties that reach the ruler, aside from retribution, such as slander and theft, there is no pardon even if the one with the right forgives" (3).
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/219.
(2) The same source, 2/219.
(3) The same location.
