This is an important issue in al-Shatibi's methodology, which is that if a meaning is established as a universal principle and then there are particular instances that contradict it, does this invalidate the entire induction, thereby nullifying the universal principle? This is similar to cases of retribution (qisas) or in jihad, and the expenditure of funds in that context, as well as the rulings on spoils and gains, while it is known that among the necessities are the preservation of life and the preservation of wealth. Al-Shatibi states that this does not undermine the principle because it has been established universally and definitively. He says: "These three universals, if they have been legislated for their specific interests, are not negated by the failure of individual particulars. There are examples of this: as for necessities, punishments are legislated for deterrence, even though we find some who are punished but do not desist from what they were punished for" (1). "As for needs, shortening the prayer during travel is legislated for alleviation and to avoid hardship, and the wealthy do not experience hardship, thus shortening is legislated for them. Loans are permitted for the sake of aiding the needy, even though they are also permissible without need. As for enhancements, purification is legislated for cleanliness in general, even though some forms contradict cleanliness, such as tayammum. All of this does not detract from the original permissibility because if the universal principle is established universally, the failure of some particulars to meet the requirements of the universal does not remove it from being universal. Furthermore, the predominant majority is considered in Sharia as a definitive generality because the individual exceptions do not form a universal that opposes this established universal" (2). He then said: "The individual exceptions may be absent due to a ruling outside the requirements of the universal, thus they are not included under it at all, or they may be included but their inclusion is not apparent to us, or they may be included in our view but are opposed by something that is more deserving of consideration. The wealthy may be said to experience hardship, but we do not rule that way due to its obscurity, or we may say regarding punishments that did not deter their subject that the interest is not solely for deterrence" (3). He then said: "In any case, the opposition of particulars does not negate the validity of the establishment of universals for interests" (4).
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/35.
(2) The same source.
(3) The same source.
(4) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/35.
