And if the universal (kulli) is neither annulled nor compromised, is the particular (juz'i) annulled? There is a detailed discussion on this, but in general, it is not annulled because it pertains to another universal principle. Annulment of it would disrupt the universal. He says: "Standing in prayer, for example, and all other concessions that undermine the firm commands and prohibitions are in accordance with the principle of necessities in urgent needs. Similarly, there are exceptions to the prohibitive rules such as 'araya (gifts of fruits), qard (loan), musaqa (sharecropping), salam (forward sale), and the like. If we were to consider all necessities, that would undermine the urgent needs or the necessities as well. However, if we consider the particulars at each level, that would preserve that level and others from the universals, for those three ranks support one another and specify one another" (1).
Thus, al-Shatibi does not see the annulment of either the universal or the particular when a conflict arises, because it is a conflict from one side without the other, or in one situation without another, or in one place without another; it is an apparent conflict. He said: "The universal is considered in its specification of the general particular or its restriction of the absolute and similar cases, such that it does not disrupt the particular at all" (2).
However, if the conflict between the particular and the universal is from every side and there is no way out, the particular must be annulled. He said: "It cannot be said that this is a contradiction because it leads to the particular being disregarded and considered together, for we say that this is from two sides, and because not every particular is considered in every situation" (3).
The definitive and the similar:
__________
(1) The same source, 3/5.
(2) The same source, 3/6.
(3) The same source, 3/6, and the reader can notice that the contradiction that al-Shatibi attempted to resolve is inevitable, for he had to say that it is possible to disregard the particular. These two principles - for him - cannot coexist or continue together, which are the application of the universals and particulars together and the non-compromise of the universal by the opposition of individual particulars. In cases where the conflict between the universal and the particular does not cease, one of these two principles must be invalidated, and we will discuss this issue in chapter ten.
