The first condition relates to what has been previously mentioned, that the legal evidence must be definitive (qat'i) or refer back to something definitive in order for it to be validly applied. Here, it is not required to refer back to something definitive, but rather to a meaning that is valid in consideration. If it refers back to a definitive meaning, there is no doubt that it is valid in consideration. For the interpreted meaning may be potentially acceptable, meaning it does not contradict a principle; if it cannot be validly applied, it cannot be rejected either. Rather, it is subject to induction (istiqra) or the observation of this meaning in other contexts. It is not necessary for it to reach definitiveness in order to be accepted; rather, it must be considered before reaching definitiveness, and this applies to others that share the same meaning, so that the possibility of useful induction for definitiveness is available. As for the third condition, that the interpreted term must be capable of the meaning, this is clear. As for the second condition, that the interpreted meaning must be generally agreed upon among the differing parties, it does not state that there is consensus (ijma), as consensus on one meaning among multiple possible meanings is difficult or rare. Therefore, this condition aims to ensure that the interpreted meaning is not generally dismissed, as this indicates its weakness and that there is a stronger opposing argument(1).
Abrogation (naskh):
It has been mentioned in the definition of the definitive (muhkam) and ambiguous (mutashabih) that the definitive has two meanings: general and specific. It opposes the ambiguous in the general sense and opposes abrogation in the specific sense. Al-Shatibi said in defining abrogation: "They said in the definition of abrogation: It is the lifting of the legal ruling by a later legal evidence"(2).
And just as ambiguity does not occur in general principles, abrogation does not occur in them either. He said: "The general principles of necessities, needs, and enhancements have not been abrogated; rather, abrogation has occurred in specific matters based on the evidence of induction"(3).
__________
(1) The same source, 3/61.
(2) The same source, 3/64.
(3) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 3/70.
