Therefore, the particular is raised because it opposes the universal entirely, and it has been previously established that the particular is only acted upon if it refers back to a definitive meaning, that is, to a universal. In our case of the opposition of the particular to the general, if the particular does not refer back to a definitive, then there is no issue. However, if the particular refers back to a definitive, then the opposition here is akin to the opposition of universals, that is, definitives, and this situation does not occur. Thus, the only way to resolve the opposition here is through specification (takhsees), by excluding from the general the instances or cases for which the particular has come, or that specification may have another meaning. Since lifting the application of the general from some instances or in some cases is considered a negation of the universal, there remains only the other meaning. Therefore, we find al-Shatibi using specification, but he does not mean what the usuliyyin (jurisprudents) intended; rather, he says that specification is metaphorical, not literal. He states: "The generalities of the resolute (al-‘azaim) may initially appear to be specified by the concessions (rukhsa), but they are not truly specified by them; rather, the resolute remains general even if it is said that the concessions have specified it, for this is a metaphorical expression, not a literal one" (1). The concessions referred to here are those that pertain to universals of the category of necessities, such as lifting hardship or harm or what is unbearable; thus, the concession here is akin to the resolute, and not to the other designation of concession, which is the specified instances that do not refer to universals (2). Therefore, the specification mentioned above is the specification of the resolute by concessions of the kind that is unbearable, such as the standing of one who cannot stand in prayer.
__________
(1) The same source, 3/165.
(2) See: Chapter Five, Section One, p. 236.
