He said: "An example of this is when it was revealed: { Indeed, you and what you worship besides Allah are the fuel of Hell } (1), some of the disbelievers said: 'Then the angels are worshipped and the Messiah is worshipped.' So it was revealed: { Indeed, those for whom the good word has preceded from Us } (2), the verse" (3). Al-Shatibi refers to those who object to him and say that specification, meaning the exclusion of some of what the general term encompasses, occurs in the Sharia, evidenced by the fact that the first text indicated the punishment of those who are worshipped besides Allah, and that the second text came to exempt some of the worshipped ones from punishment, such as the angels and the Messiah. Al-Shatibi refutes this claim and affirms his opinion, saying: "As for His saying: { Indeed, you and what you worship } the verse, the people responded to Ibn al-Zubair's objection regarding it by pointing out his ignorance of its context, and what was narrated in the context that the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) said to him: 'How ignorant you are of the language of your people, O boy' "(4), because it came in the verse: { Indeed, you and what you worship }, and 'what' does not refer to that which is not rational, so how can it include the angels and the Messiah?" (5). Thus, the text originally does not include the angels or the Messiah.
__________
(1) Surah Al-Anbiya, 98.
(2) Surah Al-Anbiya, 101.
(3) Al-Shatibi, Al-Muwafaqat, 3/156.
(4) I did not find it in its wording or meaning. The meaning that is presented here is the opposite of what Al-Shatibi argued; for example, Al-Qurtubi says: "This verse is a foundation for the claim of generality, and that it has specific forms, contrary to those who said: it does not have a form designated to indicate it, which is false based on what this verse and others indicate. This Abdullah ibn al-Zubair understood 'what' in his ignorance to refer to all that was worshipped, and the Quraysh, who were eloquent Arabs, agreed with him on that. If there were no generality, it would not have been valid to exclude from it, and since it has been found, it is for generality, and this is clear." Al-Jami' li Ahkam al-Qur'an, 11/343. When interpreting His saying: { Indeed, you and what you worship } the verse.
(5) Al-Shatibi, Al-Muwafaqat, 3/158.
