The scholars of usul (usul al-fiqh) among the Hanafis distinguished themselves by not advocating for a particular school in the principles, but rather supporting a school in the branches. Hence, it was said that the paths of usul branched into two ways:
The first: the method of the jurists, which refers to the method of the Hanafis.
The second: the method of the theologians, which refers to the method of the Shafi'is, Malikis, and Hanbalis.
Then after that arose what is called the method of the later scholars, which refers to the approach of the scholars who combined both methods in their books. Dr. Muhammad Hassan Hayto says: "This 'Epistle' was the first book compiled in the principles of jurisprudence (usul al-fiqh), and thus the imams and scholars continued to explain it and draw light from it"(1). He then says: "Many works were authored on it, and compilations were refined, and the paths of researchers in it branched into two methods:
The first method is that which is known as the method of the theologians, and they are the Shafi'is and the majority.
The second method is that which is known as the method of the jurists, specifically the Hanafis(2).
Then he said: "The method of the theologians: this was concerned with clarifying issues and establishing principles, and it tends towards rational argumentation as much as possible, abstracting the foundational issues from the jurisprudential branches, similar to the scholars of theology"(3). Then he said: "The method of the jurists: this is more relevant to jurisprudence and more suitable for the jurisprudential branches, establishing the foundational principles based on what has been transmitted from the branches by their imams, claiming that these are the principles that those imams observed when they derived those branches.."(4). After that, Dr. Hito mentions some of the most important books that combine the two methods, such as (The Collection of Collections) by Imam Taj al-Din al-Subki, and (The Certainty of Authenticity) by the scholar Muhibb al-Din ibn Abd al-Shakur(5).
__________
(1) The same reference, p. 6.
(2) The same place.
(3) The same place.
(4) The same reference, p. 7.
(5) See: the same reference, p. 12.
