What has been mentioned earlier under the title: "The Definitive and the Ambiguous" suffices here for most of this research, as the general (mujmal) is ambiguous (mutashabih), while the definitive (muhkam) is the determined, established, and clarified meaning.
Based on this, after the completion of religion and the perfection of grace, there is no general matter upon which a legal obligation (taklif) can be based. He says: "The general is either related to something upon which no obligation can be based, or it does not exist in the Sharia" (1), and his intention is not that there is no clarified general in the Sharia, but rather that after its perfection, there is no general, and if it exists, there is no obligation in it. He said: "If there exists in the Sharia something general or ambiguous in meaning or something that is not understood, it is not correct to impose an obligation based on it, because it is an obligation of the impossible and a request for what cannot be attained. This generality appears in the ambiguous matters that Allah, Exalted is He, mentioned, saying: { And others are ambiguous } (2). When Allah clarified that there are ambiguous matters in the Qur'an, He also indicated that there is no obligation except to believe in it according to the intended meaning, not according to what the obligated person understands from it" (3).
The Qur'an contains the entirety of the Sharia (4), and the Sunnah serves to clarify what is in the Qur'an, without introducing any legislation beyond what is contained therein. Similarly, clarification occurs through the consensus (ijma) of the Companions (may Allah be pleased with them). The consensus of the Companions is not akin to rational agreement or anything else among them regarding something they see without a basis in the Sharia, as there is nothing that requires a ruling except that it has a basis in the Sharia. Rather, consensus is their agreement that what has come in the Sharia is thus, meaning that consensus reveals evidence. Al-Shatibi said: "The clarification of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) is a correct clarification, with no doubt about its authenticity, because he was sent for that purpose. Allah, Exalted is He, said: { And We have sent down to you the Reminder that you may make clear to the people what was sent down to them } (5), and there is no disagreement in this. As for the clarification by the Companions, if they agree on what they have clarified, there is also no doubt about its authenticity" (6).
__________
(1) The same source, 3/197.
(2) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 3/198.
(3) This will be clarified in the next section.
(4) Surah an-Nahl, 44.
(5) Al-Muwafaqat, 3/195.
