And after mentioning the opinions of some of the Companions and scholars on this matter, he said: "No scholar has turned to the Qur'an regarding an issue except that he found a basis for it therein. The closest groups to the lack of solutions to emerging issues are the people of the apparent (dhahir) who deny analogy (qiyas), and it has not been established that they were unable to provide evidence for any of the issues. Ibn Hazm al-Dhahiri said: 'There is no branch of jurisprudence (fiqh) except that it has a basis in the Book and the Sunnah (tradition), which we know, and praise be to Allah, except for partnership (qirad), for which we have not found a basis in either of them at all,' to the end of what he said. And you know that partnership is a type of lease (ijara), and the basis of lease in the Qur'an is established, as evidenced by the approval of the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) and the practice of the Companions (may Allah be pleased with them)."
And if the Qur'an contains an explanation of everything in the Sharia, it is comprehensive of it, even though its texts are finite. Therefore, its definition of legal rulings is not a text on specific issues and occurrences, but rather a definition of general principles. He said: "The Qur'an, despite its brevity, is comprehensive, and it can only be comprehensive if the collection within it consists of general matters, because the Sharia was completed with its full revelation, as Allah, Exalted is He, said: { This day I have perfected for you your religion } (3). And you know that the prayer, zakat, jihad, and similar matters do not have all their rulings clarified in the Qur'an; rather, the Sunnah clarified them, as well as the various types of marriages, contracts, retaliation, punishments, and others. Furthermore, if we look at the return of the Sharia to its moral universals, we find that they are fully encompassed in the Qur'an, which includes necessities, needs, and enhancements, and each of these is complete, and all of this is also evident."
The need for interpreting the Qur'an through opinion:
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi's position is that he says: except that it has a basis in the Book, without adding the Sunnah.
(2) The same source, 3/219.
(3) Surah Al-Ma'idah, 3.
(4) Al-Shatibi, Al-Muwafaqat, 3/217.
