What al-Shatibi says in this case is that it is a hypothetical situation that does not exist, and if it does exist, its occurrence is rare and does not harm the methodology. He states: "The speculative (dhanni) that has no supporting definitive (qat'i) source and does not contradict a definitive source is in a state of scrutiny. Its category is that of the strange analogy (qiyas gharīb), and it may be said that it is not accepted because it establishes something contrary to what is customary in its like, and induction (istiqra) indicates that it does not exist, and these two weaken the reliance on it absolutely because it is in a state of doubt" (1). Thus, such a case has not occurred, and induction confirms this. If we assume its occurrence, what should be done? He says: "The scholars have employed the strange analogy in the chapters of analogy (qiyas), and although it is rare, that is not harmful if the evidence indicates its validity" (2). The resolution of the issue in this case is that the Qur'an has come with general principles (kulliyat) and its revelation is such that the subsequent verses clarify the preceding ones. Likewise, the Sunnah has come to clarify the Qur'an, as well as what has been transmitted from the righteous predecessors (salaf) who are more knowledgeable about the language and its implications and about the Sharia and its objectives (maqasid). Therefore, if something from the evidence is particular (juz'iyy), it is originally a clarification of the general principles. If we cannot relate it back to the general principles, we can rely on evidence from particulars, as it may have a meaning that establishes a general principle to which it returns. This does not harm or undermine the foundation of the methodology because if it exists, it is rare. Therefore, if there is no definitive source to which the meaning can be referred or any evidence by consideration, the general Arabic understanding of the text can be validly employed. He states: "Accordingly, in deriving rulings from the Qur'an, one should not limit oneself to it without considering its explanation, which is the Sunnah, because if it is general and contains general matters, as in the case of prayer, zakat, hajj, fasting, and the like, there is no alternative to looking at its clarification. After that, one should consider the interpretation of the righteous predecessors, for they are more knowledgeable about it than others; otherwise, the general Arabic understanding of whoever has acquired it suffices for what is lacking in that, and Allah knows best" (3).
__________
(1) The same source, 3/12.
(2) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 3/12.
(3) The same source, 3/217 - 218.
