He said: "The statement of the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) is a correct statement, with no doubt about its authenticity, for he was sent for that purpose. Allah, Exalted is He, says { And We have sent down to you the Reminder that you may make clear to the people what was sent down to them } (1), and there is no disagreement about it. As for the statements of the Companions, if they all agree on what they have clarified, there is also no doubt about its authenticity" (2).
As for the actions of the caliphs within the Sunnah, they are the actions of the rightly guided caliphs, as they pertain to consensus (ijma), and consensus is the consensus of the Companions. Thus, the actions of the caliphs can only be included in the consensus of the Companions if they are the rightly guided caliphs. This is because the caliph has the right to obedience from the Ummah. He compels the people to a legal matter, thereby achieving consensus. Al-Shatibi cites the actions of the rightly guided caliphs and the consensus of the Companions in more than one place in his book with the hadith: "Adhere to my Sunnah and the Sunnah of the rightly guided caliphs after me; cling to it with your molar teeth" (3)" (4).
Accordingly, the Sunnah is: the saying of the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him), his actions, his approvals, and what has come from the Companions by consensus and from the rightly guided caliphs. The latter does not refer to their consensus but rather to what has come from the rightly guided caliph in terms of saying, action, or approval, which has been accepted by the Companions by consensus, thus it returns to the consensus of the Companions, may Allah be pleased with them all.
The Sunnah is an explanation of the Book:
__________
(1) Surah An-Nahl, 44.
(2) Al-Shatibi, Al-Muwafaqat, 3/195.
(3) Narrated by al-Tirmidhi (2600) who said: It is حسن صحيح (hasan sahih). And Abu Dawood (3991), Ibn Majah (42, 43), Ahmad (16521), and al-Darimi (95).
(4) Al-Shatibi, Al-Muwafaqat, 3/196-197 and 4/3.
