He says: "It has been mentioned at the beginning of the Book of Evidence that the report of a single narrator (khabar al-wahid) is acceptable in practice if it is based on an established principle; otherwise, one should refrain from acting upon it, and the fact that it is based on an established principle refers to it being a particular case under a general Qur'anic meaning" (1). He also said: "Because Allah has made the Qur'an a clarification of all things, it follows that the Sunnah (tradition) must be included in it in general" (2). Then he said: "Thus, the Sunnah is, in essence, an explanation of what is contained therein, and this is the meaning of it being referred back to it; furthermore, complete induction (istiqra) indicates this" (3). He then stated: "It has been previously mentioned at the beginning of the Book of Evidence that the Sunnah refers back to the Book, and otherwise, one must refrain from accepting it, which is a sufficient principle in this regard" (4).
Al-Shatibi responds to objections against him by asserting that although the Sunnah is an explanation, it contains additions because it includes what is not found in the Qur'an. He says: "And his statement in the question: 'It must be an addition' is accepted, but is this addition an increase in explanation of what is explained, since the explanation clarifies something not found in the explained text, or is it an addition of another meaning that does not exist in the Book? This is the point of contention" (5). He then clarifies that this addition is an increase in explanation, and since it is an explanation, there is something being explained; thus, there is a basis in the Book. He states: "All of this has its origin in the Qur'an, which the Book clarifies either in summary or in detail or in both ways, and the Sunnah has come to confirm all of that with what is clearer in understanding and more comprehensive in explanation" (6).
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 4/5.
(2) Ibid, 4/6.
(3) The same source.
(4) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 4/6.
(5) Ibid, 4/10.
(6) Ibid, 4/18.
