The fact that the Sunnah (tradition) is an explanation of the Qur'an is indisputable, but the details of the meaning of explanation or how the Sunnah clarifies the Qur'an, although largely agreed upon, do contain some variation or disagreement in meaning among the scholars. For example, it is well-known that the Sunnah specifies the Qur'an, which is what is meant by it being an explanation. Al-Shatibi rejects specification as previously indicated, and among the scholars, there are those who do not see the specification of the definitive (qat'i) by the speculative (dhanni) (1). Likewise, the Sunnah may introduce independent legislation that has no basis in the Qur'an, and this does not exclude it from being an explanation, as it has a basis, which is the evidence indicating the obligation to adhere to the Sunnah. This meaning is not accepted by al-Shatibi, as for him, the Sunnah being an explanation means that there must be a basis in the Qur'an for what the Sunnah brings, and the obligation to adhere to the Sunnah is the obligation to follow the explanation and details that it provides.
The scholars of usul al-fiqh (principles of jurisprudence) have various opinions and details regarding the explanation of the Qur'an by the Sunnah, and the first of these, at the forefront, is Imam al-Shafi'i (may Allah have mercy on him), who made the first chapter in his book (al-Risala) titled "The Chapter on How Explanation Occurs." Under this title, he mentioned five types (2), and among what he mentioned that al-Shatibi does not agree with is the fourth type of explanation, which includes everything that the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) legislated that is not in the Book (3). He stated in his explanation of the types of explanation: "Among them is what he clarified from the Sunnah of his Prophet without a text from the Book" (4). Al-Shatibi mentioned meanings regarding what is meant by the Sunnah being an explanation of the Qur'an, accepting most of them as they are included in the meaning he advocates. He said: "The consideration remains in the aspect by which the Book indicated the Sunnah until it became inclusive of it in general, even though it is an explanation of it in detail" (5). He then remarked: "Indeed, people have various interpretations regarding this meaning" (6). He mentioned six interpretations or aspects:
__________
(1) This is the position of the Hanafi scholars.
(2) See: Imam al-Shafi'i, al-Risala, pp. 26-40, paragraph 53-125.
(3) See: the same source, p. 32, paragraph 96.
(4) The same source, p. 33, paragraph 100.
(5) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 4/13.
(6) The same location.
