This meaning of clarification is included in the meaning that al-Shatibi speaks of, because what the Sunnah brings clarifies the origin to which the issue returns; thus, the ruling of the Sunnah refers back to an origin. Within this meaning, al-Shatibi explains how to refer some meanings, which some claim the Sunnah has independently legislated, back to origins found in the Qur'an, which will be elaborated upon in the next discussion.
Fifth: He said: "Among them is the consideration of what is composed of the scattered evidences of the Qur'an from combined meanings, for the evidences may come in different meanings, but they are encompassed by one meaning similar to the command in public interest (maslaha) and preference (istihsan). The Sunnah comes in accordance with that one meaning, and it is known or presumed that this meaning is derived from the totality of those individuals based on the validity of the evidence indicating that the Sunnah has come to clarify the Book" (1). The meaning contained in this text is generally accepted by the imams of usul al-fiqh (principles of jurisprudence), but there is nothing in it that necessitates mention among them; however, it is important to al-Shatibi. If we examine it, we find it composed of two premises and a conclusion. The first premise is that a new meaning is derived from the totality of evidences that is not indicated by any one of the evidences alone, which is called the indication of the sign from the concept. An example of this is His saying, Exalted is He: { And his gestation and weaning [period] is thirty months } (2), and His saying: { And weaning is in two years } (3). From these two texts, it is understood that the minimum duration of gestation is six months. The second premise is that the Sunnah comes in accordance with this derived meaning, meaning that its meaning refers back to the derived meaning. As for the conclusion, it is that the meaning brought by the Sunnah is a clarification that has an origin in the Qur'an. This is what al-Shatibi seeks, and this meaning mentioned here for clarification is not customary among the imams, as they do not need to prove that the meaning returns to a Qur'anic meaning for it to be considered a clarification. However, al-Shatibi uses this type of indication to establish Qur'anic meanings. Thus, he can refer what is thought to be independently legislated by the Sunnah back to Qur'anic origins. The intention here is not to belittle what al-Shatibi does, for the indication of the sign is one of the accepted indications, but rather to clarify the intent of al-Shatibi. Therefore, attention should be paid to what he said in the above text; he did not say: "the consideration of what is composed of scattered evidences," but rather said: "from the scattered evidences of the Qur'an."
__________
(1) The same source, 4/26.
(2) Surah Al-Ahqaf, 15.
(3) Surah Luqman, 14.
