As for the soul, which has a blood money (diya), al-Shatibi addressed it and mentioned in addition to it the blood money for limbs, saying: "The blood money for the soul was mentioned by Allah, Exalted is He, in the Qur'an (1), but the blood money for limbs was not mentioned, and it is something that is difficult to analogize to the intellects. The hadith (2) clarifies the blood money for them in a way that seems to follow the analogy that is difficult to determine, so it is necessary to refer to it and to follow its example" (3). The blood money for the fetus is also included with the soul. He said: "Indeed, Allah, Exalted is He, made the soul equal to the soul and distinguished between the limbs in His saying: { And We ordained for them therein a life for a life }" (4)
__________
(1) Allah, Exalted is He, said: { And whoever kills a believer intentionally, his recompense is Hell, wherein he will abide eternally therein, and Allah will be angry with him and curse him and prepare for him a great punishment. } Surah an-Nisa, 92.
(2) Al-Nasa'i narrated from Amr ibn Hazm from his father from his grandfather: "That the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) wrote to the people of Yemen a letter, and in his letter was that whoever kills a believer intentionally, there is retaliation unless the guardians of the slain agree to forgive, and that the blood money for the soul is one hundred camels, and that for the nose if it is cut off, there is blood money, and for the tongue there is blood money, and for the lips there is blood money, and for the testicles there is blood money, and for the back there is blood money, and for the eyes there is blood money, and for one leg there is half the blood money, and for the ma'muma (a wound in the abdomen) there is one third of the blood money, and for the ja'ifa (a deep wound) there is one third of the blood money, and for the manqala (a wound that causes a limb to be severed) there are fifteen camels, and for each finger of the hands and feet there are ten camels, and for a tooth there are five camels, and for a wound on the face there are five camels, and that a man is killed for a woman, and for the people of gold, there is one thousand dinars" (4770). He said: "Ibtat: killed without justification."
(3) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 4/23.
(4) And the complete verse is { And We ordained for them therein a life for a life and an eye for an eye and a nose for a nose and an ear for an ear and a tooth for a tooth and for wounds is legal retribution. } Surah al-Ma'idah, 45.
