To the end of the verse, this pertains to intentional acts, whereas for mistakes, the blood money (diya) is due, as He says: { The freeing of a believing slave and a compensation paid to his family } (1). And the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) clarified the blood money for limbs "(2). Then he said: "Two parties came into conflict regarding the fetus if the mother aborts it due to a blow or something similar, for it resembles a part of a human being like other limbs and resembles a complete human in its creation. The Sunnah has clarified that its blood money is a quarter of a slave (3) and that it has the same ruling as a person due to the lack of a clear determination of one party over it" (4). Thus, the basis of blood money and the basis of retribution (qisas) are mentioned in the Qur'an; what applies to other limbs has a basis in the Book, and it should be understood through analogy, but its analogy is complex, and the Prophet (peace be upon him) clarified it. After it has been established that the ruling of limbs returns to the Book, the ruling regarding the fetus remains: does it revert to the ruling of a person since it is a complete soul, or does it revert to the limbs since it is a part of its mother? This is something that poses a challenge for the jurist, and the Sunnah has clarified it and provided it with a specific ruling between the two (5).
__________
(1) Surah An-Nisa, 92.
(2) Al-Shatibi, Al-Muwafaqat. 4/21.
(3) Narrated by Abu Huraira (may Allah be pleased with him) who said: "The Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) ruled regarding the fetus of a woman from Banu Lihyan that fell dead with the blood money of a quarter of a slave or a female slave." Bukhari (6343), (6395) and Muslim (3183), (3184) and Tirmidhi (1330) who said: It is hasan sahih.
(4) Al-Shatibi, Al-Muwafaqat, 4/21.
(5) This and what preceded from Al-Shatibi's responses refer to the fourth meaning of clarification; see: Al-Muwafaqat, 4/18 - 29, and see: p. 375 of this book.
