He said: "The scholars have always relied on those who are not jurists in these matters, but they considered the people of knowledge regarding what they followed specifically, which is the imitation (taqlid) in determining the applicable rule" (1).
The process of independent reasoning (ijtihad) that leads to knowing the ruling involves the three types of ijtihad, and it is not necessary for a single jurist to perform all of them or to be capable of doing so.
What becomes clear, whether in terms of the types of ijtihad or the conditions of each type, does not imply that it is permissible for the jurist to give an opinion or to issue a fatwa, nor is it permissible to take his statement or fatwa, as these conditions indicate his competence in understanding and giving an opinion. He may not issue a fatwa unless he is formally appointed for fatwa through his words and actions; otherwise, the ability to engage in ijtihad may be possessed by a disbeliever. He said: "The scholars have permitted that ijtihad in the Sharia can occur from a disbeliever who denies the existence of the Creator, the message, and the Sharia, if the ijtihad is based on premises whose correctness is assumed, whether they are so in reality or not" (2). And he said: "The mufti stands in the community in the place of the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him)" (3). And he said: "The fatwa from the mufti is obtained through speech, action, and acknowledgment" (4). Based on this, he stated: "The fatwa is not valid from one who contradicts the requirements of knowledge" (5). And he said: "As for his actions, if they are contrary to the actions of the people of religion and knowledge, it is not valid to follow them or to make them a model among the actions of the righteous predecessors, just as his acknowledgment is part of his actions" (6). Then he said: "For the one who contradicts with his limbs indicates his contradiction with his words, and the one who contradicts with his words indicates his contradiction with his limbs, for all derive from one heart matter; this is a clarification of the invalidity of his fatwa in general" (7).
Legitimate ijtihad in Sharia:
__________
(1) The same source, 4/93.
(2) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 4/58.
(3) The same source, 4/140.
(4) The same source, 4/141.
(5) The same source, 4/144.
(6) The same source, 4/145.
(7) The same place.
