In the legal terminology, many phrases have been mentioned in the definition of qiyas (analogy), the most famous of which is the statement of Abu al-Husayn al-Basri: "Qiyas is the attainment of the ruling of the original in the branch due to their similarity in the reason for the ruling according to the mujtahid (jurist)"(1).
Al-Amidi mentioned the definition of Judge Abu Bakr al-Baqillani: "Qiyas is the carrying of a known upon another known in establishing a ruling for both or denying it from both by a common factor between them"(2).
These definitions and others have not escaped criticism and the arrows of critique. Some of the imams of usul (principles of jurisprudence) from the Shafi'i school have stated that the most solid of them is the definition of the aforementioned judge. Al-Zarkashi said(3): "The scholars among us have chosen it"(4).
However, al-Amidi mentioned a definition of qiyas as: "It is the equality between the branch and the original in the reason inferred from the ruling of the original"(5), and he commented, saying: "This phrase is comprehensive and sufficient for the purpose of others"(6).
__________
(1) Abu al-Husayn al-Basri, the Mu'tazili, Al-Mu'tamad fi Usul al-Fiqh, 2/195, introduction by Sheikh Khalil al-Mays, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya, Beirut, 1st ed., 1403 AH - 1983 CE.
(2) Al-Amidi, Al-Ihkam fi Usul al-Ahkam 3/167. Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya, Beirut, edited by Sheikh Ibrahim al-Ajuz.
(3) Al-Zarkashi: Muhammad ibn Abdullah Badreddin al-Zarkashi, born and died in Egypt 745 - 794 AH. He was buried in the small Qaraafa. He is originally from the Turks, belongs to the Shafi'i school, and was nicknamed al-Zarkashi because he learned the art of decoration in his youth, and he was also called al-Minhaji because he memorized the Minhaj al-Talibin of Imam al-Nawawi. See in his biography: Introduction to the editing of his mentioned book, vol. 1.
(4) Al-Zarkashi, Al-Bahr al-Muhit fi Usul al-Fiqh 4/6, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya, Beirut, Lebanon, 1st ed., 1421 AH - 2000 CE, edited by Dr. Muhammad Muhammad Tamer.
(5) Al-Amidi, Al-Ihkam 3/171.
(6) The same source.
