However, how does the follower (muqallid) recognize the error? He said: "If it is said, how does one know which of the opinions is such and which is not? The answer is that this is one of the duties of the jurists (mujtahidin), for they are the ones who know what conforms to or contradicts the truth, while others have no distinction in this regard." (1) He also said: "If it is asked whether there is a criterion for those who are not jurists but are knowledgeable in this matter, the answer is that there is a relative criterion. It is that what is considered an error or a slip is very rare in the Sharia." (2) Then he said: "If a person holds an opinion that is isolated from the majority of the ummah, then your belief should be that the truth is with the vast majority of the jurists, not with the followers." (3)
As for the jurist who makes an error, he should not be disparaged. It has been mentioned in previous texts that he is excused and rewarded. He said: "Just as it is not appropriate to attribute deficiency to him or to disparage him for it, nor to think that he is bold in opposing the truth, for all of this contradicts what his rank in religion necessitates." (4)
__________
(1) The same source, 4/97.
(2) The same location.
(3) The same location. Among what he transmitted regarding this: "Mu'adh ibn Jabal used to say in his sermon: Beware of the deviation of the wise, for the devil may speak through the tongue of the wise with a word of misguidance, and the hypocrite may say it. So receive the truth from whoever brings it, for the truth has light. They asked: How is the deviation of the wise? He said: It is a word that terrifies you and you reject it, and you say: What is this? So beware of his deviation and do not be turned away from it, for it is likely that he will return and acknowledge the truth," 4/94.
(4) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 4/95. He mentioned examples of these slips attributed to some of the Companions and Followers, including drinking nabidh and selling one dirham for two dirhams in hand-to-hand transactions, and he said that these cannot be relied upon as differences in legal matters. See: 4/96.
