And after mentioning a number of these attributes, he said: "These are a set of characteristics that indicate to a person who among the scholars is more worthy of issuing fatwas and being followed, and the differences in these attributes clarify the preferred from the less preferred." (1)
Rejected principles in fatwa:
__________
(1) The same source, 4/172. Many scholars have expressed various opinions regarding the importance and virtue of fatwa, as well as its dangers and the necessity of being cautious about it. Among these is the saying of al-Nawawi: "Know that issuing fatwas is of great danger, significant status, and much virtue, for the mufti is the inheritor of the prophets (peace and blessings be upon them) and is fulfilling a communal obligation, yet he is susceptible to error. For this reason, they said: the mufti speaks on behalf of Allah." He also said: "From Ibn Mas'ud and Ibn Abbas (may Allah be pleased with them), whoever issues a fatwa on everything he is asked about is a fool." He mentioned: "From Ibn Abbas and Muhammad ibn Ajlan, if a scholar neglects to say 'I do not know,' he has struck his own neck." He also said: "And al-Shafi'i, when asked about a matter, did not respond, and when asked why, he said: Until I know whether the virtue lies in silence or in answering." And from al-Athram: I heard Ahmad ibn Hanbal frequently say: 'I do not know,' and that was regarding matters he was familiar with the opinions on. And from al-Haytham ibn Jamil: I witnessed Malik being asked about forty-eight matters, and he said 'I do not know' in thirty-two of them." He said: "And Abu Hanifa said: Were it not for the distinction from Allah, the Exalted, that knowledge would be lost, I would not issue fatwas; they would have the reward and I would bear the burden." See: The Etiquettes of Fatwa, the Mufti, and the Inquirer by Abu Zakariya Yahya ibn Sharaf al-Nawawi al-Dimashqi (631 - 676 AH/1233 - 1277 CE), edited by Bassam Abdul Wahab al-Jabi. Dar al-Bashair al-Islamiyya, 2nd edition, 1411 AH - 1990 CE, which is concise and beneficial on its subject.
