The proponents of qiyas (analogy) have cited evidence from the Qur'an and the Sunnah, as well as the consensus of the Companions (may Allah be pleased with them) on the authority of qiyas and its status as a source of legislation. These evidences are discussed in the foundational books of usul al-fiqh (principles of jurisprudence), and it is not our topic to address them here(1).
The pillars of analogy (qiyas):
It has pillars that are not valid without them, which are the original case that is being compared, the ruling of the original case indicated by the Sharia, and the branch that is compared to the original. The reason for the ruling of the original case, which is a description present in the original, and by its presence in the branch, the ruling can be extended from the original to the branch.
Al-Amidi said: "When the meaning of analogy (qiyas) is known, it consists of four pillars: the original case (asl), the branch case (far'), the ruling of the original case, and the common characteristic (wasf al-jami')"(2). It is essential for all four pillars to be present for the analogy to be valid. Al-Zarkashi said: "The original case, the branch case, the reason (illah), and the ruling of the original case must all be mentioned in the analogy"(3).
His conditions:
It has conditions that must be met for it to be valid, and its conditions are the conditions of its pillars. The aim here is not to elaborate on the discussions of analogy (qiyas), but rather to mention some of these conditions as examples of these discussions, and to provide further detail on the rationale (illah) and its conditions, which are necessary in the research.
One of the conditions of the original (asl) - for example - is that it should not be derived from another, meaning that it should not be a branch in another analogy. If it is a branch, then it is not more deserving of being analogized to than its original(4).
One of the conditions for the branch (far') is that the reason ('illah) present in it must share in the reason of the origin (asl); otherwise, it is not possible to extend the ruling of the origin to the branch(5).
One of its conditions is that its ruling is not explicitly stated, for there is no analogy (qiyas) in a ruling when there is a text regarding it(6).
__________
(1) For example, see: Al-Burhan by al-Juwayni, vol. 2; Al-Ihkam by al-Amidi, vol. 3; Al-Bahr al-Muhit by al-Zarkashi, vol. 4; Al-Mahsul by al-Razi, vol. 5; and others.
(2) Al-Amidi, al-Ihkam 3/171.
(3) Al-Zarkashi, Al-Bahr Al-Muhit 4/67.
(4) Al-Amidi, Al-Ihkam 3/174. Al-Amidi mentioned this condition among the conditions for the ruling of the origin.
(5) The same source, p. 219.
(6) The same source, p. 221.
