One of the conditions for the ruling of the original (asl) is that it must be a legal ruling (hukm shar'i), because the purpose of analogy (qiyas) on the original is to ascertain the legal ruling, and because the subject matter is legal analogy and not logical or rational analogy, as the latter is one of the means of knowledge in rational matters, and it is not a way to know the ruling of the Sharia, neither through certainty nor conjecture. What is being sought is the ruling of Allah, Exalted is He, and there is no way to it except through textual evidence (dalil naqli).
Another condition is that the evidence for the establishment of the ruling of the original must be a legal evidence.
It is also a condition that it should not deviate from the norms of analogy, such as the number of units of prayer (rak'ahs), the estimation of zakat (almsgiving) amounts, and the limits and expiations, as these are not rationally understood. An example of this is the acceptance of the testimony of Khuzaymah alone, which is an exception to the rule, as well as the concessions for travel and wiping over the socks.
Another condition is that the cause (illah) must be established through one of the evidences that indicate it, which are called the pathways of the cause (masalik al-illah).
As for the conditions of the cause, we will address them in the second section of this chapter.
The cause:
__________
(1) Al-Amidi, al-Ihkam, p. 173.
(2) The same source, p. 174.
(3) Imam Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti said in his book (Al-Itqan fi Ulum al-Quran): "Ibn Ashtah narrated in the Musahif from Al-Layth ibn Sa'd who said: The first to compile the Quran was Abu Bakr, and it was written by Zayd. People would come to Zayd ibn Thabit, and he would not write a verse except with the testimony of two just witnesses. The last verse of Surah Al-Bara'ah was not found except with Khuzaymah ibn Al-Thabit, who said: Write it, for the Messenger of Allah (peace and blessings be upon him) made his testimony equal to that of two men, so it was written." 1/60, Dar al-Fikr - Beirut.
(4) See Al-Amidi, al-Ihkam 3/175 - 176, and for more details on these conditions, see: Al-Ihkam by Al-Amidi, vol. 3, Al-Mahsul by Al-Razi, vol. 5, Al-Mustasfa by Al-Ghazali, vol. 2, Irshad al-Fuhul by Al-Shawkani, and Al-Bahr al-Muhit by Al-Zarkashi, vol. 4.
(5) See: the previous footnote.
