2 - Clarifying how al-Shatibi's consideration of these principles differs from that of other imams who acknowledge them, through their specification, and if one may say, the narrowing of their applicability so that he can claim certainty regarding them. After that, he claimed that they are acknowledged and practiced by all, even if they explicitly state their rejection. Among this is his assertion multiple times that the principle of blocking the means (sadd al-dhara'i) is practiced by Abu Hanifa and al-Shafi'i (may Allah be pleased with them), while their failure to apply it in many instances does not detract from its validity, as it is not due to their disregard for the principle but rather for other reasons.

3 - Clarifying the reality of these principles in al-Shatibi's methodology, as these terms: public interest (maslaha mursala), juristic preference (istihsan), and blocking the means (sadd al-dhara'i) are names for the principles and not their texts. The name does not reveal the true meaning, the context of its application, or its conditions. Therefore, it is incorrect to invoke al-Shatibi or his methodology or the titles of his principles or rules without understanding the reality of all of it, and then issuing opinions or fatwas that permit the unlawful or prohibit the lawful merely by using the name of the principle; this is ignorance, not knowledge, and does not yield true knowledge.

The first section
Public interest (maslaha mursala)

The meaning of public interest (maslaha mursala):
The principle of public interest (maslaha mursala) is based on the unrestricted reasoning (istidlal mursel), which in turn is based on the unrestricted suitability (munasib mursel). The unrestricted suitability is one of the categories of suitability, and suitability is the description that can be claimed as a cause by those who adhere to the path of suitability in analogy (qiyas). It leads to analogy after its conditions are met. However, reasoning is not from analogy because the description that is suitable for reasoning, even if it exists in a branch, does not exist in a specific origin to be compared to. Rather, it is a meaning that is observed to correspond with many rulings or the application of many rulings that correspond to it, thus establishing the description and considering it a valid principle in legislation, supported by many rulings that cannot be traced back to any one of them, as in each of the rulings that testify to its validity, it cannot be a cause since the ruling may be one that is not subject to reasoning or one that has another cause or there may be a description that is more suitable than it. (1)
Public interest (maslaha mursala) according to the imams:
__________
(1) See: the second and third chapters of this book.
