... It has been attributed to Ali ibn Abi Talib (may Allah be pleased with him) his statement regarding the liability of craftsmen: "People cannot be right except for that." If this is established from him, it is understood in the context of sales, not leasing. Al-Shafi'i said in al-Um: "It may be narrated from a source that the scholars of hadith do not affirm, that Ali ibn Abi Talib (may Allah be pleased with him) held the washer and dyer liable, saying: 'People cannot be right except for that.'" He also said: "It is narrated from Umar that he held craftsmen liable from a weaker source than this, and we do not know of either of them being established. It has been narrated from Ali ibn Abi Talib that he did not hold any of the laborers liable from a source that is not established." 7/88.
... Al-Shatibi said: "In the hadith: 'There should be neither harm nor reciprocating harm' (2), the principles support it in general, for the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) 'forbade a resident to sell to a nomad' (3), and he said: 'Let people be provided for by one another' (4), and he said: 'Do not throw goods until they have descended to the market' (5). This is a matter of prioritizing the public interest over the private one, thus the liability of craftsmen falls into that category." Al-I'tisam 2/378. This statement from Al-Shatibi, based on these proofs, is refuted because these proofs are general on the subject, while there are specific proofs regarding liability that prohibit it. Therefore, holding craftsmen liable is contrary to the Sharia and is not permissible.
(2) Its narration has been previously mentioned.
(3) There are many chains for it, including: Bukhari (2014), Muslim (2799), Tirmidhi (1144) who said: "Hasan Sahih," Nasai (4419), Ibn Majah (2176), Ahmad (13820), and Malik in al-Muwatta (1189).
(4) The same narration, and with these numbers, it is the same hadith: "A resident should not sell to a nomad; let people be provided for by one another," except for Malik's narration: "A resident should not sell to a nomad."
