As for the conditions for applying the principle of public interest (maslaha mursala) and the contexts in which it is applied, he said there are three matters: "The first is that it must be compatible with the objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia) in such a way that it does not contradict any of its fundamental principles or any of its evidences. The second is that the general consideration of it is based on what is rational and aligns with reasonable circumstances that, when presented to the intellects, are accepted. Thus, it has no place in acts of worship or matters that are similar to them in the realm of religious rulings" (1). "The third is that the essence of public interests returns to preserving a necessary matter and alleviating a necessary hardship in religion, and it also refers to preserving a necessary matter in the context of 'what is necessary for the fulfillment of an obligation.' Thus, it is a means and not an end, and its relation to alleviating hardship pertains to the realm of facilitation and not to that of strictness" (2). In matters of necessity, the ruling on an action based on public interest means that the action is a means to a known obligatory cause, and a condition for this is that the action itself is not obligatory in essence; otherwise, there would be no place for public interests. He states: "As for it being in the realm of necessity as a means, and what is necessary for the fulfillment of an obligation, if it is stipulated, then it is a legal condition, and thus it has no place in this regard because the text of the legislator has relieved us from further consideration. If it is not stipulated, then it is either rational or customary, and it does not necessarily have to be legal, just as it does not have to be in a known manner. For instance, if we assume the preservation of the Qur'an and knowledge without books is valid, that would be acceptable. Likewise, other necessary interests can be preserved, just as if we assume the attainment of the interest of the greater leadership without an imam, on the condition that there is no text regarding it, that would also be valid" (3). He then said: "If this is established, it is not valid to derive from its domain any of the religious objectives that are not means" (4).
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, Al-I'tisam, 2/386.
(2) The same source, 2/389.
(3) The same location.
(4) The same location.
