Zarkashi said: "Know that when the intended meaning of istihsan (juridical preference) is clarified, the criticism disappears, and Abu Hanifa is innocent before Allah of establishing a ruling without evidence" (1).
Al-Bazdawi said under the title: (The Chapter on Qiyas and Istihsan): "Both are of two types. As for one type of qiyas (analogy), it is that which has a weak effect, and the second type is that which has appeared to be corrupt while its validity and effect are concealed. One type of istihsan is that which has a strong effect, even if it is hidden. The second is that which has an apparent effect while its corruption is concealed. Istihsan, according to us, is one of the types of qiyas" (2).
From here, we understand that the istihsan criticized by al-Shafi'i and others is different from the istihsan advocated by Abu Hanifa. It should not be assumed that Abu Hanifa (may Allah have mercy on him) or any respected imam would abandon the evidence of the Sharia for his opinion, nor would he speak about the Sharia based solely on his opinion without legal evidence. So what is the istihsan intended by the Hanafis?
What is istihsan:
There have been multiple definitions of istihsan among them, all of which revolve around the idea that istihsan is a process of specification, and it is applied when there is a conflict of evidence. It has been said regarding its essence that it is acting upon the stronger of the two qiyas, that it is the specification of the cause, and that it is the specification of qiyas by the Sunnah (3).
It has also been said that it is the separation of a matter from its counterparts due to a specific evidence that necessitates departing from the first ruling to the second, whether it is based on qiyas or text, as stated by Abu al-Hasan al-Karkhi, and it has been said that this is the best explanation of istihsan (4).
It has been said that it is abandoning qiyas and adopting what is more convenient for the people (5).
__________
(1) Zarkashi, al-Bahr al-Muhit, 4/387.
(2) Al-Bazdawi, Usul al-Bazdawi, 4/4.
(3) Zarkashi, al-Bahr al-Muhit, 4/390.
(4) Same source.
(5) Al-Jurjani, Al-Ta'rifat, p. 22, authored by the noble Sharif Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Ali al-Husayni al-Jurjani al-Hanafi, 816 AH. Edited by Muhammad Basel Ayyoun al-Sud. 1st ed. 1421 AH - 2000 CE, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya, Beirut.
