He says, for example: "And similar to this is the combining of Maghrib and Isha prayers due to rain, the combining of prayers for a traveler, shortening the prayer, and breaking the fast during a long journey, as well as the prayer of fear and all other concessions that follow this path, for their essence returns to considering the outcome in achieving benefits or preventing harms in particular, where the general evidence would necessitate prohibiting that, for if we were to remain with the original general evidence, it would lead to the negation of what that evidence necessitated in terms of benefit" (1). And he said: "And similar to this is the exposure of private parts in medical treatment, partnership, and cultivation, even if the general evidence necessitates prohibition, and there are many things of this kind" (2). All these examples, even if they are said to be based on preference (istihsan), are ultimately referred back to the evidences of the Sharia. Therefore, after al-Shatibi presented examples of preference, he mentioned Ibn al-Arabi's interpretation of it, saying: "Ibn al-Arabi said in his interpretation of preference that it is the preference for abandoning the implications of the evidence through exception and concession due to opposition to what is opposed in some of its implications" (3).
Accordingly, it can be said about preference what was said about public interest (maslaha), which is that it is not a means to speak about the religion of Allah without evidence from the Sharia. Al-Shatibi said: "For preference can only be by one who prefers, which is either reason or the Sharia. As for the Sharia, its preference and disapproval have been settled because the evidences necessitated that, so there is no benefit in calling it preference, nor in establishing a definition for it that is additional to the Book, the Sunnah, and consensus, and what arises from them in terms of analogy and reasoning. Thus, only reason remains as the one who prefers; if it is based on evidence, then there is no benefit in this naming as it returns to the evidences and not to anything else, and if it is without evidence, then that is the innovation that is preferred" (4). His intention is that there is no benefit in speaking about the Sharia without evidence, even if one claims that it is preference, and whoever thinks that he is preferring in that way is indeed innovating.
The difference between public interest (maslaha) and preference (istihsan):
__________
(1) The same place.
(2) The same place.
(3) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 4/116.
(4) Al-Shatibi, al-I'tisam, 2/390.
