As for the fourth opinion: it is that which is necessitated by custom, and it is the view of Imam Fakhr al-Din al-Razi in (al-Mahsool). Its essence is that the actions and rulings of Allah, Exalted is He, are not to be rationalized. This is based on theological premises and on the notion that rationalization implies that Allah is complete in purpose, which is certainly refuted. Accordingly, for him, the cause does not hold in the sense of being necessitated by itself nor in the sense of being a motivator. The meaning of necessitated by custom is that Allah has established things in such a way that whenever this occurs, that occurs, as if we say, whenever eating occurs, satiety occurs, or whenever retribution occurs, preservation occurs. Thus, it is necessary to presume the occurrence of satiety with eating or the occurrence of preservation with retribution. This presumption is not a matter of rationalization but rather a matter of the custom running in this way. This will be documented in the third discussion of the third chapter.
This statement is refuted because rationalization in analogy (qiyas) does not mean rationalizing the actions of Allah concerning His essence, but rather it is rationalization of the legal ruling based on what the legislator has established as a cause. Al-Zarkashi said: "Know that the doctrine of the Ahl al-Sunnah is that His rulings, Exalted is He, are not rationalized, in the sense that He does not do anything for a purpose, nor is He motivated by anything to do something. Rather, He, Exalted is He, is capable of bringing about benefits without their causes and eliminating harms without their motivators" (1).
He also said: "Some of the later scholars stated: It has become well-known among the theologians that the rulings of Allah, Exalted is He, are not rationalized, and it has become well-known among the jurists that rationalization exists and that the cause is in the sense of a motivator. Many people mistakenly think that it is the motivator for the legislation, leading to a contradiction between the statements of the jurists and those of the theologians. This is not the case, and there is no contradiction; rather, the intended meaning is that the cause motivates the action of the obligated person. An example is the preservation of lives, which motivates retribution, which is the action of the obligated person ruled by the law. Thus, the ruling of the law has no cause or motivator" (2). He then said: "And Allah has established the custom that retribution is a cause for preservation" (3).
__________
(1) Al-Zarkashi, al-Bahr al-Muhit 4/112.
(2) The same source, 4/113.
(3) The same location.
