He says: "For one who argues based on the principle of permissibility that the original permission relates to a necessary meaning, it has been established that the essence of permissibility, which is choice, is a reality that pertains to necessities, and it is the foundation of interests (masalih); it is, in effect, a servant to them, if it is not, in reality, the same as them. Thus, considering the opposition in the permissible is akin to considering the opposition of the necessary in general, even if it does not appear in detail to be necessary. If this is the case, then the side of the permissible becomes more preferable than its opposition" (1).
As for the second opinion, it states: "For the one who favors the side of the opposition, he may argue that the interest of the permissible, inasmuch as it is permissible, is optional in its attainment or non-attainment, which is evidence that it does not reach the level of necessities. It is always so, because once it reaches that level, it would no longer be optional" (2). What al-Shatibi intends to indicate by presenting these two opinions is to point out that the one who does not apply the principle of blocking the means (sadd al-dhara'i) here does not do so because he does not accept the principle, but rather because blocking the means was deemed less preferable.
For further detail on this principle, one can refer to what al-Shatibi has elaborated regarding the ruling of permissibility, which is that the permissible may be permissible in part, recommended in total, or permissible in part, obligatory in total, or permissible in part, disliked in total, or permissible in part, prohibited in total. What is permissible in part and recommended or obligatory in total is the permissible for necessity or need, and in this case, the principle of blocking the means does not apply. It remains that if the principle of blocking the means is to be applied, it is applied to what is permissible in part, disliked or prohibited in total.
The second principle:
That the means to the prohibited is intended by the obligated in the permissible action. If this is the case, the permissible action becomes non-permissible.
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 1/127.
(2) The same source.
