As for the fifth opinion: it is that it is the motive for legislation. Its meaning is that the described attribute, in addition to being an indicator or sign of the ruling, is not merely a sign devoid of any meaning; it encompasses a benefit (maslaha) that is suitable for which the legislator may have enacted the ruling. The assertion that it is a benefit suitable for justification does not mean that it has become an independent cause by itself, but rather that it is valid to be a cause if its other conditions are met. The first of these conditions is that it must come in one of the paths of causation (1).
This is the concept of causation in legal terminology. The term causation is used in the terminology of grammarians to refer to what is called a cause in language, which is not a cause in analogy. An example of this is the "lam" of purpose in language, as the cause that follows it is not a cause in the original analogy.
Al-Razi said: "Indeed, He, Exalted is He, said: { And We have certainly created for Hell many of the jinn and mankind } (2), and by consensus, that cannot be an objective... like the poet's saying: 'Prepare for death and build for destruction,' and the 'lam' here is not for purpose... I say: The people of language have stated that the 'lam' is for justification, and their statement is a proof. If that is established, it must be said that it is a metaphor in these instances" (3).
The term causation is sometimes used for certain meanings in the sense of metaphor, which are not causes in analogy, such as the reason, the basis, and others. Al-Shawkani said: "And causation has names that differ according to different terminologies, such as reason, indicator, motivator, necessitator, impulse, carrier, basis, evidence, necessitating factor, obligatory factor, and influencer. The scholars have agreed that there must be evidence for the cause" (4).
__________
(1) Paths of justification: This will be discussed in the next section.
(2) Surah Al-A'raf, 179.
(3) Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, Al-Mahsool fi Usul al-Fiqh 5/140, edited by Taha Jaber Al-Alwani, Dar Al-Resalah, 2nd ed., 1412 AH - 1992 CE.
(4) Al-Shawkani, Irshad al-Fuhul, p. 207.
