This is a necessary conclusion after clarifying the characteristics of universals; the universal is established through the induction of particulars that converge on a meaning, thus becoming a universal principle. If thereafter a particular is found that contradicts or opposes this universal, this does not invalidate the universal, because the universal has been established definitively, and there is no dispute regarding its establishment. As for the particular, it is either related to something definitive or it is not. If it is related to something definitive, this is a case of conflicting definitives, which cannot occur; rather, each has a context in which it is applicable. If the particular is not related to something definitive, it can be interpreted to relate back to something definitive in order to resolve the conflict, or one may refrain from judgment on it, or it may be rejected. Therefore, the universal is not affected by the opposition of particulars and continues to apply as it is. He said: "These three universals, if they have been legislated for specific interests, are not negated by the absence of individual particulars" (1). He said: "If the universal matter is established universally, then the absence of some particulars from the implications of the universal does not remove it from being universal. Furthermore, the predominant majority is considered in Sharia just as the definitive general is, because the absent particulars do not form a universal that opposes this established universal; this is the nature of inductive universals" (2). He said: "The issues of specific entities are particulars, while the consistent rules are universals, and particulars cannot invalidate universals. Therefore, the rulings of universals remain applicable to particulars even if the meaning of the universals does not specifically appear in them" (3).
Induction is the only way to certainty:
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/34.
(2) The same source, 2/35.
(3) The same source, 3/149 - 150.
