Then he responds to this objection by saying: "The answer is that if we concede that the purpose of the Sharia (law) is for the interests of the servants, then it returns to them according to the command of the Lawgiver and within the limits He has set, not according to their whims and desires. Therefore, the legal obligations are heavy on the souls" (1). He said: "The wisdom of the All-Wise, All-Aware has decreed that the establishment of religion and the world can only be rectified and sustained by motivations from the human side that drive him to acquire what he needs for himself and others. Thus, He created for him the desire for food and drink when he is afflicted by hunger and thirst to motivate him to seek to fulfill this need as much as he can. Similarly, He created for him the desire for women to motivate him to acquire the means that lead to them" (2), and so on. He then said: "If Allah had willed, He could have imposed this with disregard for desires, or He could have imposed it while removing the innate motivations. However, He has favored His servants by making it a means to cultivate the world for the Hereafter and has made the acquisition of these desires permissible, not prohibited, but according to legal rules that are more effective in achieving benefits and more enduring than what the servant considers to be beneficial" (3).
These two ideas in al-Shatibi's thought, namely his concept of benefit (maslaha) and harm (mafsada), and his intention in saying that the Sharia was established for the interests of the servants, represent a reversal of what is commonly understood by the scholars of Usul (principles of jurisprudence) who assert that the Sharia is justified by bringing about benefits and preventing harms.
Ijtihad and Taqlid:
Allah created people for His worship, and there is no action except that there is a ruling from Allah regarding it. Therefore, it is upon the obligated person, whether he is an independent jurist (mujtahid) or a follower (muqallid), to seek the ruling of Allah. The ruling of Allah is His intention, which is understood according to what has been previously explained. The ruling of Allah, Exalted is He, is understood by the recognized jurist who comprehends the objectives of the Sharia in general and in detail, and who works with both the general principles and the specific cases when exercising ijtihad. He is the one whose conduct aligns with his fatwa, being pious and committed in his statements and actions according to what he issues in fatwas and according to what is known of the characteristics of the righteous predecessors and others among the pious and righteous in religion.
__________
(1) al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 2/117.
(2) The same source, 2/122.
(3) The same source, 2/123.
