As for the follower (muqallid), he has no consideration of the legal evidence (adillah shar'iyyah), and his pursuit of the intention of the Legislator (al-shari') is through weighing the opinions of the jurists (mujtahidin), as they serve as legal evidence for him. It is not permissible for him to choose between the opinions, as this would be following his desires.
As for the condition of understanding the objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia) in general and in detail, when the mujtahid (jurist) reaches this understanding, he can issue a fatwa (legal opinion), and his statement will be considered valid if he is pious, even if he does not know the Arabic language, as he can understand the objectives through reception and translation. He said: "If ijtihad (independent juristic reasoning) is related to deriving rulings from texts, then knowledge of Arabic is a must. However, if it is related to the meanings of benefits and harms, abstracted from the texts or accepted from the one who exercises ijtihad in the texts, then knowledge of Arabic is not required; rather, knowledge of the objectives of the Sharia in general and in detail is necessary"(1). He said: "Therefore, whoever understands the objectives of the Sharia from the establishment of rulings and reaches the rank of knowledge of them, even if his understanding comes through translation in a non-Arabic tongue, there is no difference between him and one who understands them through the Arabic language"(2).


The Second Topic
Discussion of al-Shatibi's Idea
Universals and Induction


The topic of this section:
After presenting the idea of the objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia) according to al-Shatibi in detail, and then presenting and highlighting its foundation and pillars briefly in the previous section, we will discuss this foundation and these pillars in this section and the next. The ideas that will be discussed in this section are:
1 - Al-Shatibi's condition that the principles of jurisprudence (usul al-fiqh) must be definitive.
2 - Induction and its being the only path to certainty.
3 - His statement that the universals (kulliyat) are not violated by the particulars (juz'iyat).
4 - The conceptual transmission (al-tawatur al-ma'nawi).
__________
(1) al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 4/90.
(2) The same source, 4/91.
