As for what al-Shatibi (may Allah have mercy on him) cited from His saying, Exalted is He: { And We have sent down to you the Book as a clarification for all things } (1). And His saying, Exalted is He: { And We have sent down to you the Reminder that you may make clear to the people what was sent down to them } (2). This does not support his view. As for the first verse, the Book clarifies everything, and one of the means of its clarification is the Sunnah, for the Book indicates the Sunnah, and the indication of the Book towards the Sunnah makes the clarification of the Sunnah regarding things part of the clarification of the Book regarding them. If one person says to another: "Do such and such, and everything that so-and-so tells you," or "And everything I command you in an independent book," does his statement, "and everything that so-and-so tells you" or "and everything I command you in an independent book," constitute a deficiency in clarifying what he has commanded him, or do the commands that come from so-and-so or those that appear in an independent book count as part of the clarification of what the first person wants? Therefore, the fact that the Book is a clarification for everything does not contradict the Sunnah bringing forth what is not in the Qur'an or has no basis in the Qur'an. The Qur'an has linked the command to obey Allah, Exalted is He, and to obey His Messenger (peace and blessings be upon him). He, Exalted is He, said: { O you who have believed, obey Allah and obey the Messenger } (3). And He, Exalted is He, said: { Whoever obeys the Messenger has obeyed Allah } (4). And the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) said: "I was given the Qur'an and something like it with it" (5).
__________
(1) Surah an-Nahl, 89.
(2) Surah an-Nahl, 44.
(3) Surah an-Nisa, 59, and Surah Muhammad, 33.
(4) Surah an-Nisa, 80.
(5) Al-Shawkani, Nail al-Awtar min Ahadith Sayyid al-Akhiyar, Sharh Muntaka al-Akhbar, Book of Foods and Hunting, Chapter on the principle that the default ruling for substances and things is permissibility until prohibition is established. He mentioned the hadith in the wording: "I was given the Qur'an and something like it with it" and said: it is an authentic hadith, 8/111. Dar al-Ilm - Beirut, and it was narrated by Ahmad (16546), and it has variants in the wording: "I was given the Book...".
