... Ibn Hazm has a clear commentary on this hadith in al-Ihkam 2/86, explaining its defects and invalidity.
(3) al-Zarkashi, al-Bahr al-Muhit, 3/237.
(4) The same location.
This is the meaning that al-Shatibi affirmed, disregarding its chain of transmission, considering it a definitive meaning in his view, and made it one of the pillars of his methodology. This is a meaning that the Imams of hadith and the Imams of fiqh reject. How can al-Shatibi claim that this methodology has been firmly established by the righteous predecessors and endorsed by the scholarly elite?
This idea regarding the certainty of the principles and the return to the definitive, and the hesitation in considering the reports of the singular narrators (akhbar al-ahad) until a return to a definitive meaning is established, is one of the most important pillars of al-Shatibi's methodology. It is therefore fitting that this methodology should be buried in its cradle.
Induction:
Induction is the most important pillar in al-Shatibi's methodology; it is the only way to ascertain meanings and to understand the principles of the Sharia in his view. The certainty of the meanings of texts relies on the negation of ten premises, which is impossible. The meanings of rulings are speculative interests (masalih) that have no indication in the texts, so many rulings must converge upon them to achieve a useful induction that then acquires legal value and is considered as reasons (illa) for the Sharia.
As for the claim that the texts do not indicate their meanings with certainty, this claim relies on unrealistic perceptions or logical assumptions. The texts indicate meanings that may be definitive, or they may be overwhelmingly apparent in a certain meaning, or they may allow for multiple meanings equally. Even if they are not definitively indicative in themselves, certainty may be derived from contextual clues or statements. Certainty is not conditioned in anything other than beliefs or the principles attached to them, which are sources of legislation.
