The basis of the ruling, based on what has been mentioned, is the subject of the ruling, that is, the place or reality to which the ruling pertains. For example: buying is permissible and usury is forbidden. The fact that the action is a sale is the subject of permissibility or the basis of permissibility in this action, and the fact that the action is usury is the subject of prohibition or its basis. Similarly, sheep are lawful and pigs are forbidden; thus, the fact that something is sheep is the basis of permissibility, while the fact that it is a pig is the basis of prohibition.
And the basis in the aforementioned examples is not the cause, and the mentioned rulings are not based on a cause at all.
In rulings that are based on a cause, since the ruling is linked to its cause, the term "basis" (manat) is used to refer to the cause metaphorically, which may mislead one into thinking that the cause is truly the basis; hence, this clarification is necessary. The usul scholars (usuliyyun) have differed regarding the reasoning behind rulings. Some have held that the original principle in rulings is reasoning, and that reasoning applies to all rulings, although in some rulings reasoning is suspended due to the inability of the jurist to grasp the cause, such as the number of units of prayer, the estimation of shares, obligations, expiations, and others. Others have rejected this reasoning, stating that a ruling is not to be reasoned unless its cause is established by legal evidence (1).
Those who adhere to the principle of reasoning in rulings are those who have used the term "basis" to mean "cause." An example of this is the text mentioned about al-Zarkashi earlier. Since all rulings have causes according to this group, the basis of the ruling is its cause for them. This means that one must search in the basis of the ruling for a description that is suitable for reasoning, to link the ruling to it. This description becomes the cause of the ruling and its basis, and from here arose expressions among this group such as "refining the basis" (tanqih al-manat) and "deriving the basis" (takhrij al-manat), in addition to the expression "establishing the basis" (tahqiq al-manat).
Establishing the basis:
__________
(1) This disagreement and the debate surrounding it will be addressed later in detail and with documentation.
