There is no process of induction that follows in order to arrive at universals from which the rulings of particulars can be derived, because the texts are present and ready to derive rulings from them, and the rules themselves are derived from the texts and may be speculative or definitive, and the rulings branch out based on them because they are originally legal rules derived from the legal texts.
This induction, although it is a correct rational method, has no place in the indications of the texts. Al-Shatibi, by relying on induction, treated the legal texts as one would treat natural and material phenomena, as if the texts are phenomena that have attributes and characteristics that are their meanings, and these characteristics have causes or results that are the rulings and interests. Just as a researcher looks for the characteristics of things to discover them and for the causes and effects of phenomena to understand them and benefit from that and build upon it, through observation, testing, following, and induction, al-Shatibi did the same to understand the meanings of the texts and the causes of the Sharia and its principles. Al-Shatibi himself affirms this matter; therefore, after explaining the characteristics of the universals in his methodology, he said: "These are the characteristics of the rational universals, and also the rational universals are derived from existence, which is a conventional matter, not a rational one, thus they are equivalent to the legal universals in this regard, and the difference between them is lifted" (1). Likewise, when he spoke about causes and effects in the Sharia, he supported his view with the causes and effects in rational matters or in material occurrences, saying: "The establishment of the cause is like the establishment of the effect, whether that effect is intended or not. Because when it is made a cause in the course of customs, it is considered as if it directly causes it, and this is supported by the principle of customary practices, as the relationship of effects to their causes is like the relationship of satiety to food, and quenching to water, and burning to fire, and diarrhea to senna, and all other effects to their causes. Similarly, the actions that result from our earning are attributed to us even if they are not from our earning. And if this is customary and known, the custom of the Sharia follows the same measure in legal causes with their effects" (2).
__________
(1) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 1/44.
(2) Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafaqat, 1/148.
