The second direction is a methodological inquiry, provided that it is separated from the reasoning behind God's actions, regardless of the outcome, meaning whether the principle is reasoning or non-reasoning.
Al-Zarkashi said: "Ibn al-Hajib transmitted in his discussion on classification and division the consensus of the jurists that a ruling must have a cause, and this was questioned based on the well-known principle that the actions of Allah are not attributed to a purpose"(1). He also said: "Know that the position of the Ahl al-Sunnah (People of the Sunnah) is that His rulings are not attributed to a cause in the sense that He does not do anything for a purpose, nor is He compelled by anything to do something; rather, He is Allah, Exalted is He, capable of bringing about benefits without their causes and eliminating harms without any motivators. The jurists said: The rulings are attributed to a cause, and they did not oppose the Ahl al-Sunnah, but what they meant by causation was wisdom. The Mu'tazila and those who agreed with them among the jurists restricted His actions with wisdom and narrowed them to the aspect of benefit"(2). Thus, it is common among Muslims to distinguish between the two matters, and that Allah, Exalted is He, does not act for a purpose. In the discussions of the theologians among the scholars of usul (principles of jurisprudence), there are arguments that support the position of those who oppose attributing causes to the actions of Allah, and indeed their evidence is conclusive, as al-Razi said.
The response to the reasoning behind the actions of Allah, Exalted is He:
The proponents of this idea differ regarding the methods of proof. The foundation of the concept for some of them is that Allah - Exalted is He - is wise in His creation. The consideration of purpose in His creation must either be obligatory or not obligatory. If it is obligatory, then it does not lack the intended purpose; and if it is not obligatory, then acting with a purpose is closer to being in accordance with reason than acting without a purpose(3).
__________
(1) Al-Zarkashi, Al-Bahr Al-Muhit, 4/111.
(2) The same source, 4/112.
(3) See: al-Amidi, al-Ihkam, 3/250, and see: the third section of the second chapter of this book.
