He, by saying that the objectives of the Sharia (maqasid al-sharia) came to correct a misunderstanding, saw the objectives of the Sharia as if they were merely the objectives or interests of the people as perceived by them. He came to distinguish between the two types and to say that the objectives of the Sharia are objectives of the legislator, derived from the Sharia itself, and anything else is mere delusion and imagination. The first objective of the Sharia, when a command or prohibition is issued, is submission and adherence. Thus, the primary objective of His saying, "Do" is to perform the action, and the primary objective of His saying, "Do not" is to refrain from the action. In this way, the servant, who is a servant by necessity, becomes a servant by choice. This is something that is evidenced by him.
He, by saying that the Sharia was established for the interests of the servants in both abodes, and although this statement aligns with the views of many others, he, with his new understanding of interest (maslaha) and harm (mafsada), and with his methodology in how to determine what constitutes an interest and what constitutes a harm, has transformed the meaning of this statement to become consistent with the assertion that the servants were created for the sake of the Sharia. { And I did not create the jinn and mankind except to worship Me } (1), and thus he aimed to prevent the transgression of the limits of the Sharia under the pretext of interests and objectives, and this is something that is evidenced by him.
He, by saying that the legal rulings established by the legislator as a means to legal objectives should not be taken as a means to other objectives than those which the legislator has designated as their goals, and that the legal objective should not be approached by any means other than what the legislator has made a path to it, has attempted to prevent manipulation of the religion under the pretext of its objectives, and has safeguarded his idea from being used for purposes other than what he intended. This is something that is evidenced by him.
__________
(1) Adh-Dhariyat, 56.
