The second section: What has been mentioned with a letter from the letters of reasoning, such as "lam" (ل), "ki" (كي), "in" (إن), and "ba" (ب). As for "lam," it is like His saying, Exalted is He: { so that there will be no argument for the people against Allah after the messengers } (1). This indicates reasoning by the description that the "lam" has entered upon, as the scholars of language have stated that it is for reasoning. As for "ki," it is like His saying, Exalted is He: { so that it will not be a state of wealth among the rich from you } (2). And as for "in," it is like the saying of the Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) regarding the martyrs of Uhud: "Wrap them in their blood, for they will be resurrected on the Day of Resurrection with their veins gushing blood, their color like blood and their scent like musk" (3). And as for "ba," it is like His saying, Exalted is He: { a reward for what they used to do } (4).
Al-Amidi said: "These are the explicit forms of reasoning, and when they occur, it is necessary to believe in the reasoning unless evidence indicates that reasoning was not intended, in which case it would be a metaphor for what was intended by it. This is the case with 'lam,' as if one were to say: 'Why did you do such and such?' and he replies: 'Because I intended to do so.' And as in the saying of someone: 'I pray for Allah' and the poet's saying: 'Prepare for death and build for destruction.' The intention of the action does not suffice to be a reason for the action or its purpose. Likewise, the essence of Allah, Exalted is He, cannot be a reason for prayer, nor can death be a reason for birth, nor can destruction be a reason for building. Rather, the reason for the action is what motivates the action, which are the things that can serve as motivators" (5). This means that reasoning with what has a letter of reasoning requires that it be a suitable description.
__________
(1) Surah An-Nisa, 165.
(2) Surah Al-Hashr, 7.
(3) Narrated by al-Nasa'i (1975).
(4) Surah As-Sajda, 17. And Surah Al-Ahqaf, 14. And Surah Al-Waqi'a, 24.
(5) Al-Amidi, Al-Ihkam fi Usul Al-Ahkam, 3/224. As for his statement in the text: "It is necessary to believe in reasoning," I do not find it precise; it is more accurate to omit the word "belief," so that the text reads: "Reasoning is necessary" or "The ruling must be reasoned," as the matter pertains to speculative legal rulings and juristic preference.
