The sixth approach: the approach of analogy (shabah). Its definitions have varied, and much has been said about it. Al-Shawkani said: "Analogy (shabah), which some jurists call inference (istidlal)..." Ibn al-Anbari said: "I do not see a more obscure issue in the matters of usul (principles) than this." They have disagreed on its definition; al-Juwayni said: "It cannot be defined." Others said: "It can be defined"(1). Al-Ghazali said: "The meaning of analogy is the association of the original and the branch by a description, while acknowledging that this description is not a cause (illa) for the ruling, unlike the analogy of the cause, which is an association based on what is the cause of the ruling. If the usuliyun (principles scholars) did not intend to include this type of analogy in their discussions, I do not know what they meant, and how they distinguished it from pure analogy (tard) and from similarity"(2). Al-Juwayni said: "Analogy does not correspond to the ruling in the manner of kinship; it is distinct from pure analogy, as pure analogy is a mere ruling that is not supported by meaning or similarity"(3). He then elaborated, stating in summary: "The analogy of similarity is the resemblance of the branch to the original in a way that strongly suggests the inclusion of the branch with the original, without the emergence of a cause that necessitates the inclusion. An example of this is the inclusion of ablution (wudu) with dry ablution (tayammum) in the requirement of intention (niyyah), for there is no suitable meaning in either ablution or dry ablution that necessitates the inclusion of one with the other. Nevertheless, the observer finds within himself a strong feeling of the correctness of the inclusion and an inclination towards it, even if he cannot articulate the cause of the analogy. Thus, the analogy of similarity is not a mere ruling but rather a following of conjecture. Al-Juwayni cited al-Shafi'i's expression regarding the issue of including ablution with dry ablution, intending thereby to indicate that al-Shafi'i relied on similarity without being able to articulate the cause, saying: 'Two purifications; how can they be separated?'(4). The statement of the one who said: 'Whoever's divorce is executed, his repudiation is executed' is considered an analogy of similarity(5).
__________
(1) Al-Shawkani, Irshad al-Fuhul. p. 220. And see: Al-Mahsool by al-Razi, vol. 5.
(2) Pure analogy (tard): meaning that whenever the description is found, the ruling is found.
(3) Al-Ghazali, Al-Mustasfa. 2/311.
(4) Al-Juwayni, Al-Burhan. 2/527. Paragraph: 725.
(5) Al-Juwayni, Al-Burhan. 2/527. Paragraph: 725.
