As for those who associate the following rationale with the method of indication and hinting at the specified rationales, like those that come through the method of text or consensus, they argue about the difference in the permissibility of specifying the stipulated ones due to the disagreement in specifying those that come through the method of indication and hinting. The derived rationale according to this group is the rationale that comes through all other methods such as analogy (qiyas), opposition (al-‘aks), examination and division (sabr wa taqsim), and similarity (munasaba) and resemblance (shabah), and they do not permit specifying it. They assert that the specification of the derived rationale is not permissible, because the failure to consider the described attribute through these methods is akin to nullifying the attribute or akin to its non-establishment altogether. This is due to the lack of confidence in these methods in the first place. Thus, the branching of disagreement in this issue and the confusion in the transmission from the imams is attributed to the differing intentions behind the terminologies, and this is something that should be noted when studying the books of the imams of usul (usul al-fiqh) concerning analogy and rationale.
Al-Zarkashi said: "Know that the cause (illa) is either rational (aqli) or textual (sam'i). The rational cannot be restricted by the consensus of scholars of reasoning... They only differed regarding the textual, which can either be derived (mustanbata) or explicitly stated (mansusa). If it is derived, then al-Mawardi and al-Ruyani firmly asserted that it cannot be restricted in the sense that the cause does not remain a proof beyond the specific ruling due to the invalidity of relying on it." (1)
10- One of the conditions of the derived reason ('illa) is that it should not invalidate its original source. This condition applies only to derived reasons and not to those explicitly stated. Al-Amidi said: "The derived reason must not be from the ruling that it is based upon in a way that invalidates the ruling from which it was derived. This is like the reasoning for the obligation of a sheep in the case of zakat due to fulfilling the needs of the poor, as this would negate the obligation of the sheep, and the negation of the original ruling from which it was derived necessarily invalidates the derived reason, as its validity depends on its consideration in that context."(2)
__________
(1) Al-Zarkashi, Al-Bahr Al-Muhit. 4/122.
(2) Al-Amidi, al-Ihkam. 3/215.
