Al-Amidi says: "Abu Zayd said: 'The appropriate (munasib) is a term for that which, if presented to the intellects, would be accepted by them' (1). However, he saw that this definition, although linguistically accurate, is insufficient in the realm of proving the cause (illah). He said: 'There is no way for the debater to prove it against his opponent in the context of discussion, for the opponent may say: This is something my intellect has not accepted, so it is not appropriate for me, even if the intellect of another has accepted it' (2). This points to the differing concepts among people regarding what is appropriate and what is not. Therefore, Al-Amidi's definition includes what Al-Juwayni elaborated on regarding the necessity of proving the correlation of the benefit (maslaha) with the linking of the ruling to the description, and that the benefit must be legally acceptable or something that is suitable to be intended by the legislator; this condition prevents disagreement in the consideration of what constitutes a benefit and what constitutes a harm (mafsada). He said: 'The truth of the matter is that the appropriate is a clear, defined description from which it follows that the arrangement of the ruling in accordance with it results in what is suitable to be intended by the legislation of that ruling, whether that ruling is negation or affirmation, and whether that intended outcome is the attainment of a benefit or the prevention of a harm' (3).
Al-Zarkashi reported from Ibn al-Hajib al-Maliki: 'The appropriate is a clear, defined description that logically results from the arrangement of the ruling upon it what is suitable to be intended from the attainment of a benefit and the prevention of a harm. If the description is hidden or not defined, its concomitant is considered, which is the presumption, for the unseen does not inform the unseen, like travel due to hardship' (4).
Ibn Qudamah al-Maqdisi said: 'And its meaning is that the establishment of the ruling is followed by a benefit' (5).
Al-Qarafi said: 'The appropriateness is what entails the attainment of a benefit and the prevention of a harm' (6).
__________
(1) Al-Amidi, al-Ahkam. 3/237.
(2) The same source.
(3) The same source.
(4) See: Al-Zarkashi, al-Bahr al-Muhit. 4/187.
(5) Ibn Qudamah al-Maqdisi, Rawdat al-Nazir wa Jannat al-Manazir. p. 268, edited by Saif al-Din al-Katib, Dar al-Kitab al-Arabi - Beirut, 1st ed., 1401 AH - 1981 CE.
(6) Shihab al-Din al-Qarafi, Sharh Tanqih al-Fusul fi Ikhtisar al-Mahsol. p. 391. Dar al-Fikr, Cairo.
